<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI
 </h3>
 <p>
 On the following morning young Mr. Ware anticipated events by inscribing
 in his diary for the day, immediately after breakfast, these remarks:
 “Arranged about piano. Began work upon book.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The date indeed deserved to be distinguished from its fellows. Theron was
 so conscious of its importance that he not only prophesied in the little
 morocco-bound diary which Alice had given him for Christmas, but returned
 after he had got out upon the front steps of the parsonage to have his hat
 brushed afresh by her.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Wonders will never cease,” she said jocosely. “With you getting
 particular about your clothes, there isn’t anything in this wide world
 that can’t happen now!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “One doesn’t go out to bring home a piano every day,” he made answer.
 “Besides, I want to make such an impression upon the man that he will deal
 gently with that first cash payment down. Do you know,” he added, watching
 her turn the felt brim under the wisp-broom’s strokes, “I’m thinking some
 of getting me a regular silk stove-pipe hat.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Why don’t you, then?” she rejoined, but without any ring of glad
 acquiescence in her tone. He fancied that her face lengthened a little,
 and he instantly ascribed it to recollections of the way in which the
 roses had been bullied out of her own headgear.
 </p>
 <p>
 “You are quite sure, now, pet,” he made haste to change the subject, “that
 the hired girl can wait just as well as not until fall?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh, <em>my</em>, yes!” Alice replied, putting the hat on his head, and smoothing
 back his hair behind his ears. “She’d only be in the way now. You see,
 with hot weather coming on, there won’t be much cooking. We’ll take all
 our meals out here, and that saves so much work that really what remains
 is hardly more than taking care of a bird-cage. And, besides, not having
 her will almost half pay for the piano.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But when cold weather comes, you’re sure you’ll consent?” he urged.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Like a shot!” she assured him, and, after a happy little caress, he
 started out again on his momentous mission.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Thurston’s” was a place concerning which opinions differed in Octavius.
 That it typified progress, and helped more than any other feature of the
 village to bring it up to date, no one indeed disputed. One might move
 about a great deal, in truth, and hear no other view expressed. But then
 again one might stumble into conversation with one small storekeeper after
 another, and learn that they united in resenting the existence of
 “Thurston’s,” as rival farmers might join to curse a protracted drought.
 Each had his special flaming grievance. The little dry-goods dealers asked
 mournfully how they could be expected to compete with an establishment
 which could buy bankrupt stocks at a hundred different points, and make a
 profit if only one-third of the articles were sold for more than they
 would cost from the jobber? The little boot and shoe dealers, clothiers,
 hatters, and furriers, the small merchants in carpets, crockery, and
 furniture, the venders of hardware and household utensils, of leathern
 goods and picture-frames, of wall-paper, musical instruments, and even
 toys⁠—all had the same pathetically unanswerable question to
 propound. But mostly they put it to themselves, because the others were at
 “Thurston’s.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The Rev. Theron Ware had entertained rather strong views on this subject,
 and that only a week or two ago. One of his first acquaintances in
 Octavius had been the owner of the principal book-store in the place⁠—a
 gentle and bald old man who produced the complete impression of a
 bibliophile upon what the slightest investigation showed to be only a
 meagre acquaintance with publishers’ circulars. But at least he had the
 air of loving his business, and the young minister had enjoyed a long talk
 with, or rather, at him. Out of this talk had come the information that
 the store was losing money. Not even the stationery department now showed
 a profit worth mentioning. When Octavius had contained only five thousand
 inhabitants, it boasted four book-stores, two of them good ones. Now, with
 a population more than doubled, only these latter two survived, and they
 must soon go to the wall. The reason? It was in a nutshell. A book which
 sold at retail for one dollar and a half cost the bookseller ninety cents.
 If it was at all a popular book, “Thurston’s” advertised it at eighty-nine
 cents⁠—and in any case at a profit of only two or three cents. Of
 course it was done to widen the establishment’s patronage⁠—to bring
 people into the store. Equally of course, it was destroying the book
 business and debauching the reading tastes of the community. Without the
 profits from the light and ephemeral popular literature of the season, the
 book-store proper could not keep up its stock of more solid works, and
 indeed could not long keep open at all. On the other hand, “Thurston’s”
 dealt with nothing save the demand of the moment, and offered only the
 books which were the talk of the week. Thus, in plain words, the book
 trade was going to the dogs, and it was the same with pretty nearly every
 other trade.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron was indignant at this, and on his return home told Alice that he
 desired her to make no purchases whatever at “Thurston’s.” He even
 resolved to preach a sermon on the subject of the modern idea of admiring
 the great for crushing the small, and sketched out some notes for it which
 he thought solved the problem of flaying the local abuse without
 mentioning it by name. They had lain on his desk now for ten days or more,
 and on only the previous Friday he had speculated upon using them that
 coming Sunday.
 </p>
 <p>
 On this bright and cheerful Tuesday morning he walked with a blithe step
 unhesitatingly down the main street to “Thurston’s,” and entered without
 any show of repugnance the door next to the window wherein, flanked by
 dangling banjos and key-bugles built in pyramids, was displayed the sign,
 “Pianos on the Instalment Plan.”
 </p>
 <p>
 He was recognized by some responsible persons, and treated with
 distinguished deference. They were charmed with the intelligence that he
 desired a piano, and fascinated by his wish to pay for it only a little at
 a time. They had special terms for clergymen, and made him feel as if
 these were being extended to him on a silver charger by kneeling admirers.
 </p>
 <p>
 It was so easy to buy things here that he was a trifle disturbed to find
 his flowing course interrupted by his own entire ignorance as to what kind
 of piano he wanted. He looked at all they had in stock, and heard them
 played upon. They differed greatly in price, and, so he fancied, almost as
 much in tone. It discouraged him to note, however, that several of those
 he thought the finest in tone were among the very cheapest in the lot.
 Pondering this, and staring in hopeless puzzlement from one to another of
 the big black shiny monsters, he suddenly thought of something.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I would rather not decide for myself,” he said, “I know so little about
 it. If you don’t mind, I will have a friend of mine, a skilled musician,
 step in and make a selection. I have so much confidence in⁠—in her
 judgment.” He added hurriedly, “It will involve only a day or two’s
 delay.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The next moment he was sorry he had spoken. What would they think when
 they saw the organist of the Catholic church come to pick out a piano for
 the Methodist parsonage? And how could he decorously prefer the request to
 her to undertake this task? He might not meet her again for ages, and to
 his provincial notions writing would have seemed out of the question. And
 would it not be disagreeable to have her know that he was buying a piano
 by part payments? Poor Alice’s dread of the washerwoman’s gossip occurred
 to him, at this, and he smiled in spite of himself. Then all at once the
 difficulty vanished. Of course it would come all right somehow. Everything
 did.
 </p>
 <p>
 He was on firmer ground, buying the materials for the new book, over on
 the stationery side. His original intention had been to bestow this
 patronage upon the old bookseller, but these suavely smart people in
 “Thurston’s” had had the effect of putting him on his honor when they
 asked, “Would there be anything else?” and he had followed them
 unresistingly.
 </p>
 <p>
 He indulged to the full his whim that everything entering into the
 construction of “Abraham” should be spick-and-span. He watched with his
 own eyes a whole ream of broad glazed white paper being sliced down by the
 cutter into single sheets, and thrilled with a novel ecstasy as he laid
 his hand upon the spotless bulk, so wooingly did it invite him to begin.
 He tried a score of pens before the right one came to hand. When a box of
 these had been laid aside, with ink and pen-holders and a little bronze
 inkstand, he made a sign that the outfit was complete. Or no⁠—there
 must be some blotting-paper. He had always used those blotting-pads given
 away by insurance companies⁠—his congregations never failed to
 contain one or more agents, who had these to bestow by the armful⁠—but
 the book deserved a virgin blotter.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron stood by while all these things were being tied up together in a
 parcel. The suggestion that they should be sent almost hurt him. Oh, no,
 he would carry them home himself. So strongly did they appeal to his
 sanguine imagination that he could not forbear hinting to the man who had
 shown him the pianos and was now accompanying him to the door that this
 package under his arm represented potentially the price of the piano he
 was going to have. He did it in a roundabout way, with one of his droll,
 hesitating smiles. The man did not understand at all, and Theron had not
 the temerity to repeat the remark. He strode home with the precious bundle
 as fast as he could.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I thought it best, after all, not to commit myself to a selection,” he
 explained about the piano at dinner-time. “In such a matter as this, the
 opinion of an expert is everything. I am going to have one of the
 principal musicians of the town go and try them all, and tell me which we
 ought to have.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “And while he’s about it,” said Alice, “you might ask him to make a little
 list of some of the new music. I’ve got way behind the times, being
 without a piano so long. Tell him not any <em>very</em> difficult pieces, you
 know.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Yes, I know,” put in Theron, almost hastily, and began talking of other
 things. His conversation was of the most rambling and desultory sort,
 because all the while the two lobes of his brain, as it were, kept up a
 dispute as to whether Alice ought to have been told that this “principal
 musician” was of her own sex. It would certainly have been better, at the
 outset, he decided; but to mention it now would be to invest the fact with
 undue importance. Yes, that was quite clear; only the clearer it became,
 from one point of view, the shadier it waxed from the other. The problem
 really disturbed the young minister’s mind throughout the meal, and his
 abstraction became so marked at last that his wife commented upon it.
 </p>
 <p>
 “A penny for your thoughts!” she said, with cheerful briskness. This
 ancient formula of the farm-land had always rather jarred on Theron. It
 presented itself now to his mind as a peculiarly aggravating banality.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I am going to begin my book this afternoon,” he remarked impressively.
 “There is a great deal to think about.”
 </p>
 <p>
 It turned out that there was even more to think about than he had
 imagined. After hours of solitary musing at his desk, or of pacing up and
 down before his open book-shelves, Theron found the first shadows of a
 May-day twilight beginning to fall upon that beautiful pile of white
 paper, still unstained by ink. He saw the book he wanted to write before
 him, in his mental vision, much more distinctly than ever, but the idea of
 beginning it impetuously, and hurling it off hot and glowing week by week,
 had faded away like a dream.
 </p>
 <p>
 This long afternoon, spent face to face with a project born of his own
 brain but yesterday, yet already so much bigger than himself, was really a
 most fruitful time for the young clergyman. The lessons which cut most
 deeply into our consciousness are those we learn from our children.
 Theron, in this first day’s contact with the offspring of his fancy, found
 revealed to him an unsuspected and staggering truth. It was that he was an
 extremely ignorant and rudely untrained young man, whose pretensions to
 intellectual authority among any educated people would be laughed at with
 deserved contempt.
 </p>
 <p>
 Strangely enough, after he had weathered the first shock, this discovery
 did not dismay Theron Ware. The very completeness of the conviction it
 carried with it, saturated his mind with a feeling as if the fact had
 really been known to him all along. And there came, too, after a little,
 an almost pleasurable sense of the importance of the revelation. He had
 been merely drifting in fatuous and conceited blindness. Now all at once
 his eyes were open; he knew what he had to do. Ignorance was a thing to be
 remedied, and he would forthwith bend all his energies to cultivating his
 mind till it should blossom like a garden. In this mood, Theron mentally
 measured himself against the more conspicuous of his colleagues in the
 Conference. They also were ignorant, clownishly ignorant: the difference
 was that they were doomed by native incapacity to go on all their lives
 without ever finding it out. It was obvious to him that his case was
 better. There was bright promise in the very fact that he had discovered
 his shortcomings.
 </p>
 <p>
 He had begun the afternoon by taking down from their places the various
 works in his meagre library which bore more or less relation to the task
 in hand. The threescore books which constituted his printed possessions
 were almost wholly from the press of the Book Concern; the few exceptions
 were volumes which, though published elsewhere, had come to him through
 that giant circulating agency of the General Conference, and wore the
 stamp of its approval. Perhaps it was the sight of these half-filled
 shelves which started this day’s great revolution in Theron’s opinions of
 himself. He had never thought much before about owning books. He had been
 too poor to buy many, and the conditions of canvassing about among one’s
 parishioners which the thrifty Book Concern imposes upon those who would
 have without buying, had always repelled him. Now, suddenly, as he moved
 along the two shelves, he felt ashamed at their beggarly showing.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The Land and the Book,” in three portly volumes, was the most pretentious
 of the aids which he finally culled from his collection. Beside it he laid
 out “Bible Lands,” “Rivers and Lakes of Scripture,” “Bible Manners and
 Customs,” the “Genesis and Exodus” volume of Whedon’s Commentary, some old
 numbers of the “Methodist Quarterly Review,” and a copy of “Josephus”
 which had belonged to his grandmother, and had seen him through many a
 weary Sunday afternoon in boyhood. He glanced casually through these, one
 by one, as he took them down, and began to fear that they were not going
 to be of so much use as he had thought. Then, seating himself, he read
 carefully through the thirteen chapters of Genesis which chronicle the
 story of the founder of Israel.
 </p>
 <p>
 Of course he had known this story from his earliest years. In almost every
 chapter he came now upon a phrase or an incident which had served him as
 the basis for a sermon. He had preached about Hagar in the wilderness,
 about Lot’s wife, about the visit of the angels, about the intended
 sacrifice of Isaac, about a dozen other things suggested by the ancient
 narrative. Somehow this time it all seemed different to him. The people he
 read about were altered to his vision. Heretofore a poetic light had shone
 about them, where indeed they had not glowed in a halo of sanctification.
 Now, by some chance, this light was gone, and he saw them instead as
 untutored and unwashed barbarians, filled with animal lusts and
 ferocities, struggling by violence and foul chicanery to secure a foothold
 in a country which did not belong to them⁠—all rude tramps and
 robbers of the uncivilized plain.
 </p>
 <p>
 The apparent fact that Abram was a Chaldean struck him with peculiar
 force. How was it, he wondered, that this had never occurred to him
 before? Examining himself, he found that he had supposed vaguely that
 there had been Jews from the beginning, or at least, say, from the flood.
 But, no, Abram was introduced simply as a citizen of the Chaldean town of
 Ur, and there was no hint of any difference in race between him and his
 neighbors. It was specially mentioned that his brother, Lot’s father, died
 in Ur, the city of his nativity. Evidently the family belonged there, and
 were Chaldeans like the rest.
 </p>
 <p>
 I do not cite this as at all a striking discovery, but it did have a
 curious effect upon Theron Ware. Up to that very afternoon, his notion of
 the kind of book he wanted to write had been founded upon a popular book
 called “Ruth the Moabitess,” written by a clergyman he knew very well, the
 Rev. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Ray Mifflin. This model performance troubled itself not at all
 with difficult points, but went swimmingly along through scented summer
 seas of pretty rhetoric, teaching nothing, it is true, but pleasing a good
 deal and selling like hot cakes. Now, all at once Theron felt that he
 hated that sort of book. <em>His</em> work should be of a vastly different order.
 He might fairly assume, he thought, that if the fact that Abram was a
 Chaldean was new to him, it would fall upon the world in general as a
 novelty. Very well, then, there was his chance. He would write a learned
 book, showing who the Chaldeans were, and how their manners and beliefs
 differed from, and influenced⁠—</p>
 <p>
 It was at this psychological instant that the wave of self-condemnation
 suddenly burst upon and submerged the young clergyman. It passed again,
 leaving him staring fixedly at the pile of books he had taken down from
 the shelves, and gasping a little, as if for breath. Then the humorous
 side of the thing, perversely enough, appealed to him, and he grinned
 feebly to himself at the joke of his having imagined that he could write
 learnedly about the Chaldeans, or anything else. But, no, it shouldn’t
 remain a joke! His long mobile face grew serious under the new resolve. He
 would learn what there was to be learned about the Chaldeans. He rose and
 walked up and down the room, gathering fresh strength of purpose as this
 inviting field of research spread out its vistas before him. Perhaps⁠—yes,
 he would incidentally explore the mysteries of the Moabitic past as well,
 and thus put the Rev. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Ray Mifflin to confusion on his own subject. That
 would in itself be a useful thing, because Mifflin wore kid gloves at the
 Conference, and affected an intolerable superiority of dress and demeanor,
 and there would be general satisfaction among the plainer and worthier
 brethren at seeing him taken down a peg.
 </p>
 <p>
 Now for the first time there rose distinctly in Theron’s mind that casual
 allusion which Father Forbes had made to the Turanians. He recalled, too,
 his momentary feeling of mortification at not knowing who the Turanians
 were, at the time. Possibly, if he had probed this matter more deeply, now
 as he walked and pondered in the little living-room, he might have traced
 the whole of the afternoon’s mental experiences to that chance remark of
 the Romish priest. But this speculation did not detain him. He mused
 instead upon the splendid library Father Forbes must have.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, how does the book come on? Have you got to ‘my Lady Keturah’ yet?’ ”
 </p>
 <p>
 It was Alice who spoke, opening the door from the kitchen, and putting in
 her head with a pretence of great and solemn caution, but with a
 correcting twinkle in her eyes.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I haven’t got to anybody yet,” answered Theron, absently. “These big
 things must be approached slowly.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Come out to supper, then, while the beans are hot,” said Alice.
 </p>
 <p>
 The young minister sat through this other meal, again in deep abstraction.
 His wife pursued her little pleasantry about Keturah, the second wife,
 urging him with mock gravity to scold her roundly for daring to usurp
 Sarah’s place, but Theron scarcely heard her, and said next to nothing. He
 ate sparingly, and fidgeted in his seat, waiting with obvious impatience
 for the finish of the meal. At last he rose abruptly.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I’ve got a call to make⁠—something with reference to the book,” he
 said. “I’ll run out now, I think, before it gets dark.”
 </p>
 <p>
 He put on his hat, and strode out of the house as if his errand was of the
 utmost urgency. Once upon the street, however, his pace slackened. There
 was still a good deal of daylight outside, and he loitered aimlessly
 about, walking with bowed head and hands clasped behind him, until dusk
 fell. Then he squared his shoulders, and started straight as the crow
 flies toward the residence of Father Forbes.
 </p>
 
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
