<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V
 </h3>
 <p>
 While Mr. Ware stood thus on the doorstep, through a minute of formless
 musing, the priest and the girl came out, and, somewhat to his confusion,
 made him one of their party. He felt himself flushing under the idea that
 they would think he had waited for them⁠—was thrusting himself upon
 them. The notion prompted him to bow frigidly in response to Father
 Forbes’ pleasant “I am glad to meet you, sir,” and his outstretched hand.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I dropped in by the⁠—the merest accident,” Theron said. “I met them
 bringing the poor man home, and⁠—and quite without thinking, I obeyed
 the impulse to follow them in, and didn’t realize⁠—”
 </p>
 <p>
 He stopped short, annoyed by the reflection that this was his second
 apology. The girl smiled placidly at him, the while she put up her
 parasol.
 </p>
 <p>
 “It did me good to see you there,” she said, quite as if she had known him
 all her life. “And so it did the rest of us.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Father Forbes permitted himself a soft little chuckle, approving rather
 than mirthful, and patted her on the shoulder with the air of being fifty
 years her senior instead of fifteen. To the minister’s relief, he changed
 the subject as the three started together toward the road.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Then, again, no doctor was sent for!” he exclaimed, as if resuming a
 familiar subject with the girl. Then he turned to Theron. “I dare-say you
 have no such trouble; but with our poorer people it is very vexing. They
 will not call in a physician, but hurry off first for the clergyman. I
 don’t know that it is altogether to avoid doctor’s bills, but it amounts
 to that in effect. Of course in this case it made no difference; but I
 have had to make it a rule not to go out at night unless they bring me a
 physician’s card with his assurance that it is a genuine affair. Why, only
 last winter, I was routed up after midnight, and brought off in the mud
 and pelting rain up one of the new streets on the hillside there, simply
 because a factory girl who was laced too tight had fainted at a dance. I
 slipped and fell into a puddle in the darkness, ruined a new overcoat, and
 got drenched to the skin; and when I arrived the girl had recovered and
 was dancing away again, thirteen to the dozen. It was then that I made the
 rule. I hope, Mr. Ware, that Octavius is producing a pleasant impression
 upon you so far?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I scarcely know yet,” answered Theron. The genial talk of the priest,
 with its whimsical anecdote, had in truth passed over his head. His mind
 still had room for nothing but that novel death-bed scene, with the winged
 captain of the angelic host, the Baptist, the glorified Fisherman and the
 Preacher, all being summoned down in the pomp of liturgical Latin to help
 MacEvoy to die. “If you don’t mind my saying so,” he added hesitatingly,
 “what I have just seen in there DID make a very powerful impression upon
 me.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It is a very ancient ceremony,” said the priest; “probably Persian, like
 the baptismal form, although, for that matter, we can never dig deep
 enough for the roots of these things. They all turn up Turanian if we
 probe far enough. Our ways separate here, I’m afraid. I am delighted to
 have made your acquaintance, Mr. Ware. Pray look in upon me, if you can as
 well as not. We are near neighbors, you know.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Father Forbes had shaken hands, and moved off up another street some
 distance, before the voice of the girl recalled Theron to himself.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Of course you knew HIM by name,” she was saying, “and he knew you by
 sight, and had talked of you; but MY poor inferior sex has to be
 introduced. I am Celia Madden. My father has the wagon-shops, and I⁠—I
 play the organ at the church.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I⁠—I am delighted to make your acquaintance,” said Theron, conscious
 as he spoke that he had slavishly echoed the formula of the priest. He
 could think of nothing better to add than, “Unfortunately, we have no
 organ in our church.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The girl laughed, as they resumed their walk down the street. “I’m afraid
 I couldn’t undertake two,” she said, and laughed again. Then she spoke
 more seriously. “That ceremony must have interested you a good deal, never
 having seen it before. I saw that it was all new to you, and so I made
 bold to take you under my wing, so to speak.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “You were very kind,” said the young minister. “It was really a great
 experience for me. May⁠—may I ask, is it a part of your functions, in
 the church, I mean, to attend these last rites?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Mercy, no!” replied the girl, spinning the parasol on her shoulder and
 smiling at the thought. “No; it was only because MacEvoy was one of our
 workmen, and really came by his death through father sending him up to
 trim a tree. Ann MacEvoy will never forgive us that, the longest day she
 lives. Did you notice her? She wouldn’t speak to me. After you came out, I
 tried to tell her that we would look out for her and the children; but all
 she would say to me was: ‘An’ fwat would a wheelwright, an’ him the father
 of a family, be doin’ up a tree?’ ”
 </p>
 <p>
 They had come now upon the main street of the village, with its flagstone
 sidewalk overhung by a lofty canopy of elm-boughs. Here, for the space of
 a block, was concentrated such fashionable elegance of mansions and
 ornamental lawns as Octavius had to offer; and it was presented with the
 irregularity so characteristic of our restless civilization. Two or three
 of the houses survived untouched from the earlier days⁠—prim,
 decorous structures, each with its gabled centre and lower wings, each
 with its row of fluted columns supporting the classical roof of a piazza
 across its whole front, each vying with the others in the whiteness of
 those wooden walls enveloping its bright green blinds. One had to look
 over picket fences to see these houses, and in doing so caught the notion
 that they thus railed themselves off in pride at being able to remember
 before the railroad came to the village, or the wagon-works were thought
 of.
 </p>
 <p>
 Before the neighboring properties the fences had been swept away, so that
 one might stroll from the sidewalk straight across the well-trimmed sward
 to any one of a dozen elaborately modern doorways. Some of the residences,
 thus frankly proffering friendship to the passer-by, were of wood painted
 in drabs and dusky reds, with bulging windows which marked the native
 yearning for the mediaeval, and shingles that strove to be accounted
 tiles. Others⁠—a prouder, less pretentious sort⁠—were of brick
 or stone, with terra-cotta mouldings set into the walls, and with real
 slates covering the riot of turrets and peaks and dormer peepholes
 overhead.
 </p>
 <p>
 Celia Madden stopped in front of the largest and most important-looking of
 these new edifices, and said, holding out her hand: “Here I am, once more.
 Good-morning, Mr. Ware.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron hoped that his manner did not betray the flash of surprise he felt
 in discovering that his new acquaintance lived in the biggest house in
 Octavius. He remembered now that some one had pointed it out as the abode
 of the owner of the wagon factories; but it had not occurred to him before
 to associate this girl with that village magnate. It was stupid of him, of
 course, because she had herself mentioned her father. He looked at her
 again with an awkward smile, as he formally shook the gloved hand she gave
 him, and lifted his soft hat. The strong noon sunlight, forcing its way
 down between the elms, and beating upon her parasol of lace-edged, creamy
 silk, made a halo about her hair and face at once brilliant and tender. He
 had not seen before how beautiful she was. She nodded in recognition of
 his salute, and moved up the lawn walk, spinning the sunshade on her
 shoulder.
 </p>
 <p>
 Though the parsonage was only three blocks away, the young minister had
 time to think about a good many things before he reached home.
 </p>
 <p>
 First of all, he had to revise in part the arrangement of his notions
 about the Irish. Save for an occasional isolated and taciturn figure among
 the nomadic portion of the hired help in the farm country, Theron had
 scarcely ever spoken to a person of this curiously alien race before. He
 remembered now that there had been some dozen or more Irish families in
 Tyre, quartered in the outskirts among the brickyards, but he had never
 come in contact with any of them, or given to their existence even a
 passing thought. So far as personal acquaintance went, the Irish had been
 to him only a name.
 </p>
 <p>
 But what a sinister and repellent name! His views on this general subject
 were merely those common to his communion and his environment. He took it
 for granted, for example, that in the large cities most of the poverty and
 all the drunkenness, crime, and political corruption were due to the
 perverse qualities of this foreign people⁠—qualities accentuated and
 emphasized in every evil direction by the baleful influence of a false and
 idolatrous religion. It is hardly too much to say that he had never
 encountered a dissenting opinion on this point. His boyhood had been spent
 in those bitter days when social, political, and blood prejudices were
 fused at white heat in the public crucible together. When he went to the
 Church Seminary, it was a matter of course that every member of the
 faculty was a Republican, and that every one of his classmates had come
 from a Republican household. When, later on, he entered the ministry, the
 rule was still incredulous of exceptions. One might as well have looked in
 the Nedahma Conference for a divergence of opinion on the Trinity as for a
 difference in political conviction. Indeed, even among the laity, Theron
 could not feel sure that he had ever known a Democrat; that is, at all
 closely. He understood very little about politics, it is true. If he had
 been driven into a corner, and forced to attempt an explanation of this
 tremendous partisan unity in which he had a share, he would probably have
 first mentioned the War⁠—the last shots of which were fired while he
 was still in petticoats. Certainly his second reason, however, would have
 been that the Irish were on the other side.
 </p>
 <p>
 He had never before had occasion to formulate, even in his own thoughts,
 this tacit race and religious aversion in which he had been bred. It rose
 now suddenly in front of him, as he sauntered from patch to patch of
 sunlight under the elms, like some huge, shadowy, and symbolic monument.
 He looked at it with wondering curiosity, as at something he had heard of
 all his life, but never seen before⁠—an abhorrent spectacle, truly!
 The foundations upon which its dark bulk reared itself were ignorance,
 squalor, brutality and vice. Pigs wallowed in the mire before its base,
 and burrowing into this base were a myriad of narrow doors, each bearing
 the hateful sign of a saloon, and giving forth from its recesses of night
 the sounds of screams and curses. Above were sculptured rows of lowering,
 ape-like faces from Nast’s and Keppler’s cartoons, and out of these sprang
 into the vague upper gloom⁠—on the one side, lamp-posts from which
 negroes hung by the neck, and on the other gibbets for dynamiters and
 Molly Maguires, and between the two glowed a spectral picture of some
 black-robed tonsured men, with leering satanic masks, making a bonfire of
 the Bible in the public schools.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron stared this phantasm hard in the face, and recognized it for a very
 tolerable embodiment of what he had heretofore supposed he thought about
 the Irish. For an instant, the sight of it made him shiver, as if the
 sunny May had of a sudden lapsed back into bleak December. Then he smiled,
 and the bad vision went off into space. He saw instead Father Forbes, in
 the white and purple vestments, standing by poor MacEvoy’s bedside, with
 his pale, chiselled, luminous, uplifted face, and he heard only the proud,
 confident clanging of the girl’s recital⁠—BEATUM MICHAELEM
 ARCHANGELUM, BEATUM JOANNEM BAPTISTAM, PETRUM ET PAULUM⁠—EM!⁠—AM!⁠—UM!⁠—like
 strokes on a great resonant alarm-bell, attuned for the hearing of heaven.
 He caught himself on the very verge of feeling that heaven must have
 heard.
 </p>
 <p>
 Then he smiled again, and laid the matter aside, with a parting admission
 that it had been undoubtedly picturesque and impressive, and that it had
 been a valuable experience to him to see it. At least the Irish, with all
 their faults, must have a poetic strain, or they would not have clung so
 tenaciously to those curious and ancient forms. He recalled having heard
 somewhere, or read, it might be, that they were a people much given to
 songs and music. And the young lady, that very handsome and friendly Miss
 Madden, had told him that she was a musician! He had a new pleasure in
 turning this over in his mind. Of all the closed doors which his choice of
 a career had left along his pathway, no other had for him such a magical
 fascination as that on which was graven the lute of Orpheus. He knew not
 even the alphabet of music, and his conceptions of its possibilities ran
 but little beyond the best of the hymn-singing he had heard at
 Conferences, yet none the less the longing for it raised on occasion such
 mutiny in his soul that more than once he had specifically prayed against
 it as a temptation.
 </p>
 <p>
 Dangerous though some of its tendencies might be, there was no gainsaying
 the fact that a love for music was in the main an uplifting influence⁠—an
 attribute of cultivation. The world was the sweeter and more gentle for
 it. And this brought him to musing upon the odd chance that the two people
 of Octavius who had given him the first notion of polish and intellectual
 culture in the town should be Irish. The Romish priest must have been
 vastly surprised at his intrusion, yet had been at the greatest pains to
 act as if it were quite the usual thing to have Methodist ministers assist
 at Extreme Unction. And the young woman⁠—how gracefully, with what
 delicacy, had she comprehended his position and robbed it of all its
 possible embarrassments! It occurred to him that they must have passed,
 there in front of her home, the very tree from which the luckless
 wheelwright had fallen some hours before; and the fact that she had
 forborne to point it out to him took form in his mind as an added proof of
 her refinement of nature.
 </p>
 <p>
 The midday dinner was a little more than ready when Theron reached home,
 and let himself in by the front door. On Mondays, owing to the moisture
 and “clutter” of the weekly washing in the kitchen, the table was laid in
 the sitting-room, and as he entered from the hall the partner of his joys
 bustled in by the other door, bearing the steaming platter of corned beef,
 dumplings, cabbages, and carrots, with arms bared to the elbows, and a red
 face. It gave him great comfort, however, to note that there were no signs
 of the morning’s displeasure remaining on this face; and he immediately
 remembered again those interrupted projects of his about the piano and the
 hired girl.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well! I’d just about begun to reckon that I was a widow,” said Alice,
 putting down her fragrant burden. There was such an obvious suggestion of
 propitiation in her tone that Theron went around and kissed her. He
 thought of saying something about keeping out of the way because it was
 “Blue Monday,” but held it back lest it should sound like a reproach.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, what kind of a washerwoman does THIS one turn out to be?” he asked,
 after they were seated, and he had invoked a blessing and was cutting
 vigorously into the meat.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh, so-so,” replied Alice; “she seems to be particular, but she’s mortal
 slow. If I hadn’t stood right over her, we shouldn’t have had the clothes
 out till goodness knows when. And of course she’s Irish!”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, what of THAT?” asked the minister, with a fine unconcern.
 </p>
 <p>
 Alice looked up from her plate, with knife and fork suspended in air.
 “Why, you know we were talking only the other day of what a pity it was
 that none of our own people went out washing,” she said. “That Welsh woman
 we heard of couldn’t come, after all; and they say, too, that she presumes
 dreadfully upon the acquaintance, being a church member, you know. So we
 simply had to fall back on the Irish. And even if they do go and tell
 their priest everything they see and hear, why, there’s one comfort, they
 can tell about US and welcome. Of course I see to it she doesn’t snoop
 around in here.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron smiled. “That’s all nonsense about their telling such things to
 their priests,” he said with easy confidence.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Why, you told me so yourself,” replied Alice, briskly. “And I’ve always
 understood so, too; they’re bound to tell EVERYTHING in confession. That’s
 what gives the Catholic Church such a tremendous hold. You’ve spoken of it
 often.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “It must have been by way of a figure of speech,” remarked Theron, not
 with entire directness. “Women are great hands to separate one’s
 observations from their context, and so give them meanings quite
 unintended. They are also great hands,” he added genially, “or at least
 one of them is, at making the most delicious dumplings in the world. I
 believe these are the best even you ever made.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Alice was not unmindful of the compliment, but her thoughts were on other
 things. “I shouldn’t like that woman’s priest, for example,” she said, “to
 know that we had no piano.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But if he comes and stands outside our house every night and listens⁠—as
 of course he will,” said Theron, with mock gravity, “it is only a question
 of time when he must reach that conclusion for himself. Our only chance,
 however, is that there are some sixteen hundred other houses for him to
 watch, so that he may not get around to us for quite a spell. Why,
 seriously, Alice, what on earth do you suppose Father Forbes knows or
 cares about our poor little affairs, or those of any other Protestant
 household in this whole village? He has his work to do, just as I have
 mine⁠—only his is ten times as exacting in everything except sermons⁠—and
 you may be sure he is only too glad when it is over each day, without
 bothering about things that are none of his business.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “All the same I’m afraid of them,” said Alice, as if argument were
 exhausted.
 </p>
 
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
