<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII
</h3>
<p>
 The Rev. Mr. Ware found Levi Gorringe’s law-office readily enough, but its
 owner was not in. He probably would be back again, though, in a quarter of
 an hour or so, the boy said, and the minister at once decided to wait.
</p>
<p>
 Theron was interested in finding that this office-boy was no other than
 Harvey⁠—the lad who brought milk to the parsonage every morning. He
 remembered now that he had heard good things of this urchin, as to the
 hard work he did to help his mother, the Widow Semple, in her struggle to
 keep a roof over her head; and also bad things, in that he did not come
 regularly either to church or Sunday-school. The clergyman recalled, too,
 that Harvey had impressed him as a character.
</p>
<p>
 “Well, sonny, are you going to be a lawyer?” he asked, as he seated
 himself by the window, and looked about him, first at the dusty litter of
 old papers, pamphlets, and tape-bound documents in bundles which crowded
 the stuffy chamber, and then at the boy himself.
</p>
<p>
 Harvey was busy at a big box⁠—a rough pine dry-goods box which bore
 the flaring label of an express company, and also of a well-known seed
 firm in a Western city, and which the boy had apparently just opened. He
 was lifting from it, and placing on the table after he had shaken off the
 sawdust and moss in which they were packed, small parcels of what looked
 in the fading light to be half-dried plants.
</p>
<p>
 “Well, I don’t know⁠—I rather guess not,” he made answer, as he
 pursued his task. “So far as I can make out, this wouldn’t be the place to
 start in at, if I WAS going to be a lawyer. A boy can learn here
 first-rate how to load cartridges and clean a gun, and braid trout-flies
 on to leaders, but I don’t see much law laying around loose. Anyway,” he
 went on, “I couldn’t afford to read law, and not be getting any wages. I
 have to earn money, you know.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron felt that he liked the boy. “Yes,” he said, with a kindly tone;
 “I’ve heard that you are a good, industrious youngster. I daresay Mr. Gorringe will see to it that you get a chance to read law, and get wages
 too.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Oh, I can read all there is here and welcome,” the boy explained,
 stepping toward the window to decipher the label on a bundle of roots in
 his hand, “but that’s no good unless there’s regular practice coming into
 the office all the while. THAT’S how you learn to be a lawyer. But
 Gorringe don’t have what I call a practice at all. He just sees men in the
 other room there, with the door shut, and whatever there is to do he does
 it all himself.”
 </p>
<p>
 The minister remembered a stray hint somewhere that Mr. Gorringe was a
 money-lender⁠—what was colloquially called a “note-shaver.” To his
 rustic sense, there was something not quite nice about that occupation. It
 would be indecorous, he felt, to encourage further talk about it from the
 boy.
</p>
<p>
 “What are you doing there?” he inquired, to change the subject.
</p>
<p>
 “Sorting out some plants,” replied Harvey. “I don’t know what’s got into
 Gorringe lately. This is the third big box he’s had since I’ve been here⁠—that
 is, in six weeks⁠—besides two baskets full of rose-bushes. I don’t
 know what he does with them. He carries them off himself somewhere. I’ve
 had kind of half a notion that he’s figurin’ on getting married. I can’t
 think of anything else that would make a man spend money like water⁠—just
 for flowers and bushes. They do get foolish, you know, when they’ve got
 marriage on the brain.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron found himself only imperfectly following the theories of the young
 philosopher. It was his fact that monopolized the minister’s attention.
</p>
<p>
 “But as I understand it,” he remarked hesitatingly, “Brother Gorringe⁠—or
 rather Mr. Gorringe⁠—gets all the plants he wants, everything he
 likes, from a big garden somewhere outside. I don’t know that it is
 exactly his; but I remember hearing something to that effect.”
 </p>
<p>
 The boy slapped the last litter off his hands, and, as he came to the
 window, shook his head. “These don’t come from no garden outside,” he
 declared. “They come from the dealers’, and he pays solid cash for ’em.
 The invoice for this lot alone was thirty-one dollars and sixty cents.
 There it is on the table. You can see it for yourself.”
 </p>
<p>
 Mr. Ware did not offer to look. “Very likely these are for the garden I
 was speaking of,” he said. “Of course you can’t go on taking plants out of
 a garden indefinitely without putting others in.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I don’t know anything about any garden that he takes plants out of,”
 answered Harvey, and looked meditatively for a minute or two out upon the
 street below. Then he turned to the minister. “Your wife’s doing a good
 deal of gardening this spring, I notice,” he said casually. “You’d hardly
 think it was the same place, she’s fixed it up so. If she wants any extra
 hoeing done, I can always get off Saturday afternoons.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I will remember,” said Theron. He also looked out of the window; and
 nothing more was said until, a few moments later, Mr. Gorringe himself
 came in.
</p>
<p>
 The lawyer seemed both surprised and pleased at discovering the identity
 of his visitor, with whom he shook hands in almost an excess of
 cordiality. He spread a large newspaper over the pile of seedling plants
 on the table, pushed the packing-box under the table with his foot, and
 said almost peremptorily to the boy, “You can go now!” Then he turned
 again to Theron.
</p>
<p>
 “Well, Mr. Ware, I’m glad to see you,” he repeated, and drew up a chair by
 the window. “Things are going all right with you, I hope.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron noted again the waving black hair, the dark skin, and the carefully
 trimmed mustache and chin-tuft which gave the lawyer’s face a combined
 effect of romance and smartness. No; it was the eyes, cool, shrewd,
 dark-gray eyes, which suggested this latter quality. The recollection of
 having seen one of them wink, in deliberate hostility of sarcasm, when
 those other trustees had their backs turned, came mercifully at the moment
 to recall the young minister to his errand.
</p>
<p>
 “I thought I would drop in and have a chat with you,” he said, getting
 better under way as he went on. “Quarterly Conference is only a fortnight
 off, and I am a good deal at sea about what is going to happen.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I’m not a church member, you know,” interposed Gorringe. “That shuts me
 out of the Quarterly Conference.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Alas, yes!” said Theron. “I wish it didn’t. I’m afraid I’m not going to
 have any friends to spare there.”
 </p>
<p>
 “What are you afraid of?” asked the lawyer, seeming now to be wholly at
 his ease again “They can’t eat you.”
 </p>
<p>
 “No, they keep me too lean for that,” responded Theron, with a pensive
 smile. “I WAS going to ask, you know, for an increase of salary, or an
 extra allowance. I don’t see how I can go on as it is. The sum fixed by
 the last Quarterly Conference of the old year, and which I am getting now,
 is one hundred dollars less than my predecessor had. That isn’t fair, and
 it isn’t right. But so far from its looking as if I could get an increase,
 the prospect seems rather that they will make me pay for the gas and that
 sidewalk. I never recovered more than about half of my moving expenses, as
 you know, and⁠—and, frankly, I don’t know which way to turn. It keeps
 me miserable all the while.”
 </p>
<p>
 “That’s where you’re wrong,” said Mr. Gorringe. “If you let things like
 that worry you, you’ll keep a sore skin all your life. You take my advice
 and just go ahead your own gait, and let other folks do the worrying. They
 ARE pretty close-fisted here, for a fact, but you can manage to rub along
 somehow. If you should get into any real difficulties, why, I guess⁠—”
 the lawyer paused to smile in a hesitating, significant way⁠—“I guess
 some road out can be found all right. The main thing is, don’t fret, and
 don’t allow your wife to⁠—to fret either.”
 </p>
<p>
 He stopped abruptly. Theron nodded in recognition of his amiable tone, and
 the found the nod lengthening itself out into almost a bow as the thought
 spread through his mind that this had been nothing more nor less than a
 promise to help him with money if worst came to worst. He looked at Levi
 Gorringe, and said to himself that the intuition of women was wonderful.
 Alice had picked him out as a friend of theirs merely by seeing him pass
 the house.
</p>
<p>
 “Yes,” he said; “I am specially anxious to keep my wife from worrying. She
 was surrounded in her girlhood by a good deal of what, relatively, we
 should call luxury, and that makes it all the harder for her to be a poor
 minister’s wife. I had quite decided to get her a hired girl, come what
 might, but she thinks she’d rather get on without one. Her health is
 better, I must admit, than it was when we came here. She works out in her
 garden a great deal, and that seems to agree with her.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Octavius is a healthy place⁠—that’s generally admitted,” replied the
 lawyer, with indifference. He seemed not to be interested in Mrs. Ware’s
 health, but looked intently out through the window at the buildings
 opposite, and drummed with his fingers on the arms of his chair.
</p>
<p>
 Theron made haste to revert to his errand. “Of course, your not being in
 the Quarterly Conference,” he said, “renders certain things impossible.
 But I didn’t know but you might have some knowledge of how matters are
 going, what plans the officials of the church had; they seem to have
 agreed to tell me nothing.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Well, I HAVE heard this much,” responded Gorringe. “They’re figuring on
 getting the Soulsbys here to raise the debt and kind o’ shake things up
 generally. I guess that’s about as good as settled. Hadn’t you heard of
 it?”
 </p>
<p>
 “Not a breath!” exclaimed Theron, mournfully. “Well,” he added upon
 reflection, “I’m sorry, downright sorry. The debt-raiser seems to me about
 the lowest-down thing we produce. I’ve heard of those Soulsbys; I think I
 saw HIM indeed once at Conference, but I believe SHE is the head of the
 firm.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Yes; she wears the breeches, I understand,” said Gorringe sententiously.
</p>
<p>
 “I HAD hoped,” the young minister began with a rueful sigh, “in fact, I
 felt quite confident at the outset that I could pay off this debt, and put
 the church generally on a new footing, by giving extra attention to my
 pulpit work. It is hardly for me to say it, but in other places where I
 have been, my preaching has been rather⁠—rather a feature in the town
 itself I have always been accustomed to attract to our services a good
 many non-members, and that, as you know, helps tremendously from a money
 point of view. But somehow that has failed here. I doubt if the average
 congregations are a whit larger now than they were when I came in April. I
 know the collections are not.”
 </p>
<p>
 “No,” commented the lawyer, slowly; “you’ll never do anything in that line
 in Octavius. You might, of course, if you were to stay here and work hard
 at it for five or six years⁠—”
 </p>
<p>
 “Heaven forbid!” groaned Mr. Ware.
</p>
<p>
 “Quite so,” put in the other. “The point is that the Methodists here are a
 little set by themselves. I don’t know that they like one another
 specially, but I do know that they are not what you might call popular
 with people outside. Now, a new preacher at the Presbyterian church, or
 even the Baptist⁠—he might have a chance to create talk, and make a
 stir. But Methodist⁠—no! People who don’t belong won’t come near the
 Methodist church here so long as there’s any other place with a roof on it
 to go to. Give a dog a bad name, you know. Well, the Methodists here have
 got a bad name; and if you could preach like Henry Ward Beecher himself
 you wouldn’t change it, or get folks to come and hear you.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I see what you mean,” Theron responded. “I’m not particularly surprised
 myself that Octavius doesn’t love us, or look to us for intellectual
 stimulation. I myself leave that pulpit more often than otherwise feeling
 like a wet rag⁠—utterly limp and discouraged. But, if you don’t mind
 my speaking of it, YOU don’t belong, and yet YOU come.”
 </p>
<p>
 It was evident that the lawyer did not mind. He spoke freely in reply.
 “Oh, yes, I’ve got into the habit of it. I began going when I first came
 here, and⁠—and so it grew to be natural for me to go. Then, of
 course, being the only lawyer you have, a considerable amount of my
 business is mixed up in one way or another with your membership; you see
 those are really the things which settle a man in a rut, and keep him
 there.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I suppose your people were Methodists,” said Theron, to fill in the
 pause, “and that is how you originally started with us.”
 </p>
<p>
 Levi Gorringe shook his head. He leaned back, half closed his eyes, put
 his finger-tips together, and almost smiled as if something in retrospect
 pleased and moved him.
</p>
<p>
 “No,” he said; “I went to the church first to see a girl who used to go
 there. It was long before your time. All her family moved away years ago.
 You wouldn’t know any of them. I was younger then, and I didn’t know as
 much as I do now. I worshipped the very ground that girl walked on, and
 like a fool I never gave her so much as a hint of it. Looking back now, I
 can see that I might have had her if I’d asked her. But I went instead and
 sat around and looked at her at church and Sunday-school and
 prayer-meetings Thursday nights, and class-meetings after the sermon. She
 was devoted to religion and church work; and, thinking it would please
 her, I joined the church on probation. Men can fool themselves easier than
 they can other people. I actually believed at the time that I had
 experienced religion. I felt myself full of all sorts of awakenings of the
 soul and so forth. But it was really that girl. You see I’m telling you
 the thing just as it was. I was very happy. I think it was the happiest
 time of my life. I remember there was a love-feast while I was on
 probation; and I sat down in front, right beside her, and we ate the
 little square chunks of bread and drank the water together, and I held one
 corner of her hymn-book when we stood up and sang. That was the nearest I
 ever got to her, or to full membership in the church. That very next week,
 I think it was, we learned that she had got engaged to the minister’s son⁠—a
 young man who had just become a minister himself. They got married, and
 went away⁠—and I⁠—somehow I never took up my membership when the
 six months’ probation was over. That’s how it was.”
 </p>
<p>
 “It is very interesting,” remarked Theron, softly, after a little silence⁠—“and
 very full of human nature.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Well, now you see,” said the lawyer, “what I mean when I say that there
 hasn’t been another minister here since, that I should have felt like
 telling this story to. They wouldn’t have understood it at all. They would
 have thought it was blasphemy for me to say straight out that what I took
 for experiencing religion was really a girl. But you are different. I felt
 that at once, the first time I saw you. In a pulpit or out of it, what I
 like in a human being is that he SHOULD be human.”
 </p>
<p>
 “It pleases me beyond measure that you should like me, then” returned the
 young minister, with frank gratification shining on his face. “The world
 is made all the sweeter and more lovable by these⁠—these elements of
 romance. I am not one of those who would wish to see them banished or
 frowned upon. I don’t mind admitting to you that there is a good deal in
 Methodism⁠—I mean the strict practice of its letter which you find
 here in Octavius⁠—that is personally distasteful to me. I read the
 other day of an English bishop who said boldly, publicly, that no modern
 nation could practise the principles laid down in the Sermon on the Mount
 and survive for twenty-four hours.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Ha, ha! That’s good!” laughed the lawyer.
</p>
<p>
 “I felt that it was good, too,” pursued Theron. “I am getting to see a
 great many things differently, here in Octavius. Our Methodist Discipline
 is like the Beatitudes⁠—very helpful and beautiful, if treated as
 spiritual suggestion, but more or less of a stumbling-block if insisted
 upon literally. I declare!” he added, sitting up in his chair, “I never
 talked like this to a living soul before in all my life. Your confidences
 were contagious.”
 </p>
<p>
 The Rev. Mr. Ware rose as he spoke, and took up his hat.
</p>
<p>
 “Must you be going?” asked the lawyer, also rising. “Well, I’m glad I
 haven’t shocked you. Come in oftener when you are passing. And if you see
 anything I can help you in, always tell me.”
 </p>
<p>
 The two men shook hands, with an emphatic and lingering clasp.
</p>
<p>
 “I am glad,” said Theron, “that you didn’t stop coming to church just
 because you lost the girl.”
 </p>
<p>
 Levi Gorringe answered the minister’s pleasantry with a smile which curled
 his mustache upward, and expanded in little wrinkles at the ends of his
 eyes. “No,” he said jestingly. “I’m death on collecting debts; and I
 reckon that the church still owes me a girl. I’ll have one yet.”
 </p>
<p>
 So, with merriment the echoes of which pleasantly accompanied Theron down
 the stairway, the two men parted.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
