<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III
 </h3>
 <p>
 When the three trustees had been shown in by the Rev. Mr. Ware, and had
 taken seats, an awkward little pause ensued. The young minister looked
 doubtingly from one face to another, the while they glanced with inquiring
 interest about the room, noting the pictures and appraising the furniture
 in their minds.
 </p>
 <p>
 The obvious leader of the party, Loren Pierce, a rich quarryman, was an
 old man of medium size and mean attire, with a square, beardless face as
 hard and impassive in expression as one of his blocks of limestone. The
 irregular, thin-lipped mouth, slightly sunken, and shut with vice-like
 firmness, the short snub nose, and the little eyes squinting from
 half-closed lids beneath slightly marked brows, seemed scarcely to attain
 to the dignity of features, but evaded attention instead, as if feeling
 that they were only there at all from plain necessity, and ought not to be
 taken into account. Mr. Pierce’s face did not know how to smile⁠—what
 was the use of smiles?⁠—but its whole surface radiated secretiveness.
 Portrayed on canvas by a master brush, with a ruff or a red robe for
 masquerade, generations of imaginative amateurs would have seen in it vast
 reaching plots, the skeletons of a dozen dynastic cupboards, the guarded
 mysteries of half a century’s international diplomacy. The amateurs would
 have been wrong again. There was nothing behind Mr. Pierce’s juiceless
 countenance more weighty than a general determination to exact seven per
 cent for his money, and some specific notions about capturing certain
 brickyards which were interfering with his quarry-sales. But Octavius
 watched him shamble along its sidewalks quite as the Vienna of dead and
 forgotten yesterday might have watched Metternich.
 </p>
 <p>
 Erastus Winch was of a breezier sort⁠—a florid, stout, and sandy man,
 who spent most of his life driving over evil country roads in a buggy,
 securing orders for dairy furniture and certain allied lines of farm
 utensils. This practice had given him a loud voice and a deceptively
 hearty manner, to which the other avocation of cheese-buyer, which he
 pursued at the Board of Trade meetings every Monday afternoon, had added a
 considerable command of persuasive yet non-committal language. To look at
 him, still more to hear him, one would have sworn he was a good fellow, a
 trifle rough and noisy, perhaps, but all right at bottom. But the County
 Clerk of Dearborn County could have told you of agriculturists who knew
 Erastus from long and unhappy experience, and who held him to be even a
 tighter man than Loren Pierce in the matter of a mortgage.
 </p>
 <p>
 The third trustee, Levi Gorringe, set one wondering at the very first
 glance what on earth he was doing in that company. Those who had known him
 longest had the least notion; but it may be added that no one knew him
 well. He was a lawyer, and had lived in Octavius for upwards of ten years;
 that is to say, since early manhood. He had an office on the main street,
 just under the principal photograph gallery. Doubtless he was sometimes in
 this office; but his fellow-townsmen saw him more often in the street
 doorway, with the stairs behind him, and the flaring show-cases of the
 photographer on either side, standing with his hands in his pockets and an
 unlighted cigar in his mouth, looking at nothing in particular. About
 every other day he went off after breakfast into the country roundabout,
 sometimes with a rod, sometimes with a gun, but always alone. He was a
 bachelor, and slept in a room at the back of his office, cooking some of
 his meals himself, getting others at a restaurant close by. Though he had
 little visible practice, he was understood to be well-to-do and even more,
 and people tacitly inferred that he “shaved notes.” The Methodists of
 Octavius looked upon him as a queer fish, and through nearly a dozen years
 had never quite outgrown their hebdomadal tendency to surprise at seeing
 him enter their church. He had never, it is true, professed religion, but
 they had elected him as a trustee now for a number of terms, all the same⁠—partly
 because he was their only lawyer, partly because he, like both his
 colleagues, held a mortgage on the church edifice and lot. In person, Mr. Gorringe was a slender man, with a skin of a clear, uniform citron tint,
 black waving hair, and dark gray eyes, and a thin, high-featured face. He
 wore a mustache and pointed chin-tuft; and, though he was of New England
 parentage and had never been further south than Ocean Grove, he presented
 a general effect of old Mississippian traditions and tastes startlingly at
 variance with the standards of Dearborn County Methodism. Nothing could
 convince some of the elder sisters that he was not a drinking man.
 </p>
 <p>
 The three visitors had completed their survey of the room now; and Loren
 Pierce emitted a dry, harsh little cough, as a signal that business was
 about to begin. At this sound, Winch drew up his feet, and Gorringe untied
 a parcel of account-books and papers that he held on his knee. Theron felt
 that his countenance must be exhibiting to the assembled brethren an
 unfortunate sense of helplessness in their hands. He tried to look more
 resolute, and forced his lips into a smile.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Brother Gorringe allus acts as Seckertary,” said Erastus Winch, beaming
 broadly upon the minister, as if the mere mention of the fact promoted
 jollity. “That’s it, Brother Gorringe⁠—take your seat at Brother
 Ware’s desk. Mind the Dominie’s pen don’t play tricks on you, an’ start
 off writin’ out sermons instid of figgers.” The humorist turned to Theron
 as the lawyer walked over to the desk at the window. “I allus have to
 caution him about that,” he remarked with great joviality. “An’ do <em>you</em>
 look out afterwards, Brother Ware, or else you’ll catch that pen o’ yours
 scribblin’ lawyer’s lingo in place o’ the Word.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron felt bound to exhibit a grin in acknowledgment of this pleasantry.
 The lawyer’s change of position had involved some shifting of the others’
 chairs, and the young minister found himself directly confronted by
 Brother Pierce’s hard and colorless old visage. Its little eyes were
 watching him, as through a mask, and under their influence the smile of
 politeness fled from his lips. The lawyer on his right, the cheese-buyer
 to the left, seemed to recede into distance as he for the moment returned
 the gaze of the quarryman. He waited now for him to speak, as if the
 others were of no importance.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We are a plain sort o’ folks up in these parts,” said Brother Pierce,
 after a slight further pause. His voice was as dry and rasping as his
 cough, and its intonations were those of authority. “We walk here,” he
 went on, eying the minister with a sour regard, “in a meek an’ humble
 spirit, in the straight an’ narrow way which leadeth unto life. We ain’t
 gone traipsin’ after strange gods, like some people that call themselves
 Methodists in other places. We stick by the Discipline an’ the ways of our
 fathers in Israel. No new-fangled notions can go down here. Your wife’d
 better take them flowers out of her bunnit afore next Sunday.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Silence possessed the room for a few moments, the while Theron, pale-faced
 and with brows knit, studied the pattern of the ingrain carpet. Then he
 lifted his head, and nodded it in assent. “Yes,” he said; “we will do
 nothing by which our ‘brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made
 weak.’ ”
 </p>
 <p>
 Brother Pierce’s parchment face showed no sign of surprise or pleasure at
 this easy submission. “Another thing: We don’t want no book-learnin’ or
 dictionary words in our pulpit,” he went on coldly. “Some folks may
 stomach ’em; we won’t. Them two sermons o’ yours, p’r’aps they’d do down
 in some city place; but they’re like your wife’s bunnit here, they’re too
 flowery to suit us. What we want to hear is the plain, old-fashioned Word
 of God, without any palaver or ‘hems and ha’s. They tell me there’s some
 parts where hell’s treated as played-out⁠—where our ministers don’t
 like to talk much about it because people don’t want to hear about it.
 Such preachers ought to be put out. They ain’t Methodists at all. What we
 want here, sir, is straight-out, flat-footed hell⁠—the burnin’ lake
 o’ fire an’ brim-stone. Pour it into ’em, hot an’ strong. We can’t have
 too much of it. Work in them awful deathbeds of Voltaire an’ Tom Paine,
 with the Devil right there in the room, reachin’ for ’em, an’ they yellin’
 for fright; that’s what fills the anxious seat an’ brings in souls hand
 over fist.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron’s tongue dallied for an instant with the temptation to comment upon
 these old-wife fables, which were so dear to the rural religious heart
 when he and I were boys. But it seemed wiser to only nod again, and let
 his mentor go on.
 </p>
 <p>
 “We ain’t had no trouble with the Free Methodists here,” continued Brother
 Pierce, “jest because we kept to the old paths, an’ seek for salvation in
 the good old way. Everybody can shout ‘Amen!’ as loud and as long as the
 Spirit moves him, with us. Some one was sayin’ you thought we ought to
 have a choir and an organ. No, sirree! No such tom-foolery for us! You’ll
 only stir up feelin’ agin yourself by hintin’ at such things. And then,
 too, our folks don’t take no stock in all that pack o’ nonsense about
 science, such as tellin’ the age of the earth by crackin’ up stones. I’ve
 b’en in the quarry line all my life, an’ I know it’s all humbug! Why, they
 say some folks are goin’ round now preachin’ that our grandfathers were
 all monkeys. That comes from departin’ from the ways of our forefathers,
 an puttin’ in organs an’ choirs, an’ deckin’ our women-folks out with
 gewgaws, an’ apin’ the fashions of the worldly. I shouldn’t wonder if them
 kind did have some monkey blood in ’em. You’ll find we’re a different sort
 here.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The young minister preserved silence for a little, until it became
 apparent that the old trustee had had his say out. Even then he raised his
 head slowly, and at last made answer in a hesitating and irresolute way.
 </p>
 <p>
 “You have been very frank,” he said. “I am obliged to you. A clergyman
 coming to a new charge cannot be better served than by having laid before
 him a clear statement of the views and⁠—and spiritual tendencies⁠—of
 his new flock, quite at the outset. I feel it to be of especial value in
 this case, because I am young in years and in my ministry, and am
 conscious of a great weakness of the flesh. I can see how daily contact
 with a people so attached to the old, simple, primitive Methodism of
 Wesley and Asbury may be a source of much strength to me. I may take it,”
 he added upon second thought, with an inquiring glance at Mr. Winch, “that
 Brother Pierce’s description of our charge, and its tastes and needs,
 meets with your approval?”
 </p>
 <p>
 Erastus Winch nodded his head and smiled expansively. “Whatever Brother
 Pierce says, goes!” he declared. The lawyer, sitting behind at the desk by
 the window, said nothing.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The place is jest overrun with Irish,” Brother Pierce began again.
 “They’ve got two Catholic churches here now to our one, and they do jest
 as they blamed please at the Charter elections. It’d be a good idee to
 pitch into Catholics in general whenever you can. You could make a hit
 that way. I say the State ought to make ’em pay taxes on their church
 property. They’ve no right to be exempted, because they ain’t Christians
 at all. They’re idolaters, that’s what they are! I know ’em! I’ve had ’em
 in my quarries for years, an’ they ain’t got no idee of decency or fair
 dealin’. Every time the price of stone went up, every man of ’em would
 jine to screw more wages out o’ me. Why, they used to keep account o’ the
 amount o’ business I done, an’ figger up my profits, an’ have the face to
 come an’ talk to me about ’em, as if that had anything to do with wages.
 It’s my belief their priests put ’em up to it. People don’t begin to
 reelize⁠—that church of idolatry’ll be the ruin o’ this country, if
 it ain’t checked in time. Jest you go at ’em hammer ’n’ tongs! I’ve got
 Eyetalians in the quarries now. They’re sensible fellows: they know when
 they’re well off⁠—a dollar a day, an’ they’re satisfied, an’
 everything goes smooth.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “But they’re Catholics, the same as the Irish,” suddenly interjected the
 lawyer, from his place by the window. Theron pricked up his ears at the
 sound of his voice. There was an anti-Pierce note in it, so to speak,
 which it did him good to hear. The consciousness of sympathy began on the
 instant to inspire him with courage.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I know some people <em>say</em> they are,” Brother Pierce guardedly retorted “but
 I’ve summered an’ wintered both kinds, an’ I hold to it they’re different.
 I grant ye, the Eyetalians <em>are</em> some given to jabbin’ knives into each
 other, but they never git up strikes, an’ they don’t grumble about wages.
 Why, look at the way they live⁠—jest some weeds an’ yarbs dug up on
 the roadside, an’ stewed in a kettle with a piece o’ fat the size o’ your
 finger, an’ a loaf o’ bread, an’ they’re happy as a king. There’s some
 sense in <em>that</em>; but the Irish, they’ve got to have meat an’ potatoes an’
 butter jest as if⁠—as if⁠—”
 </p>
 <p>
 “As if they’d b’en used to ’em at home,” put in Mr. Winch, to help his
 colleague out.
 </p>
 <p>
 The lawyer ostentatiously drew up his chair to the desk, and began turning
 over the leaves of his biggest book. “It’s getting on toward noon,
 gentlemen,” he said, in an impatient voice.
 </p>
 <p>
 The business meeting which followed was for a considerable time confined
 to hearing extracts from the books and papers read in a swift and formal
 fashion by Mr. Gorringe. If this was intended to inform the new pastor of
 the exact financial situation in Octavius, it lamentably failed of its
 purpose. Theron had little knowledge of figures; and though he tried hard
 to listen, and to assume an air of comprehension, he did not understand
 much of what he heard. In a general way he gathered that the church
 property was put down at $12,000, on which there was a debt of $4,800. The
 annual expenses were $2,250, of which the principal items were $800 for
 his salary, $170 for the rent of the parsonage, and $319 for interest on
 the debt. It seemed that last year the receipts had fallen just under
 $2,000, and they now confronted the necessity of making good this deficit
 during the coming year, as well as increasing the regular revenues.
 Without much discussion, it was agreed that they should endeavor to secure
 the services of a celebrated “debt-raiser,” early in the autumn, and
 utilize him in the closing days of a revival.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron knew this “debt-raiser,” and had seen him at work⁠—a burly,
 bustling, vulgar man who took possession of the pulpit as if it were an
 auctioneer’s block, and pursued the task of exciting liberality in the
 bosoms of the congregation by alternating prayer, anecdote, song, and
 cheap buffoonery in a manner truly sickening. Would it not be preferable,
 he feebly suggested, to raise the money by a festival, or fair, or some
 other form of entertainment which the ladies could manage?
 </p>
 <p>
 Brother Pierce shook his head with contemptuous emphasis. “Our women-folks
 ain’t that kind,” he said. “They did try to hold a sociable once, but
 nobody came, and we didn’t raise more ’n three or four dollars. It ain’t
 their line. They lack the worldly arts. As the Discipline commands, they
 avoid the evil of putting on gold and costly apparel, and taking such
 diversions as cannot be used in the name of the Lord Jesus.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well⁠—of course⁠—if you prefer the ‘debt-raiser’⁠—” Theron
 began, and took the itemized account from Gorringe’s knee as an excuse for
 not finishing the hateful sentence.
 </p>
 <p>
 He looked down the foolscap sheet, line by line, with no special sense of
 what it signified, until his eye caught upon this little section of the
 report, bracketed by itself in the Secretary’s neat hand:
 </p>
 <blockquote>
        <table>
                <caption>Interest Charge.</caption>
                <tbody>

 <tr><td>First mortgage (1873)</td><td>$1,000</td><td>(<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Winch)</td><td>@7</td><td>$ 70</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Second mortgage (1776)</td><td>1,700</td><td>(<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Gorringe)</td><td>@6</td><td>102</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Third mortgage (1878)</td><td>2,100</td><td>(<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Pierce)</td><td>@7</td><td>147</td></tr>
 </tbody>
 <tfoot>

<tr><td></td><td>$4,800</td><td></td><td></td><td> $319</td></tr>
</tfoot>
</table></blockquote>
 <p>
 It was no news to him that the three mortgages on the church property were
 held by the three trustees. But as he looked once more, another feature of
 the thing struck him as curious.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I notice that the rates of interest vary,” he remarked without thinking,
 and then wished the words unsaid, for the two trustees in view moved
 uneasily on their seats.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh, that’s nothing,” exclaimed Erastus Winch, with a boisterous display
 of jollity. “It’s only Brother Gorringe’s pleasant little way of making a
 contribution to our funds. You will notice that, at the date of all these
 mortgages, the State rate of interest was seven per cent. Since then it’s
 b’en lowered to six. Well, when that happened, you see, Brother Gorringe,
 not being a professin’ member, and so not bound by our rules, he could
 just as well as not let his interest down a cent. But Brother Pierce an’
 me, we talked it over, an’ we made up our minds we were tied hand an’ foot
 by our contract. You know how strong the Discipline lays it down that we
 must be bound to the letter of our agreements. That bein’ so, we seen it
 in the light of duty not to change what we’d set our hands to. That’s how
 it is, Brother Ware.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I understand,” said Theron, with an effort at polite calmness of tone.
 “And⁠—is there anything else?”
 </p>
 <p>
 “There’s this,” broke in Brother Pierce: “we’re commanded to be
 law-abiding people, an’ seven per cent <em>was</em> the law an’ would be now if
 them ragamuffins in the Legislation⁠—”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Surely we needn’t go further into that,” interrupted the minister,
 conscious of a growing stiffness in his moral spine. “Have we any other
 business before us?”
 </p>
 <p>
 Brother Pierce’s little eyes snapped, and the wrinkles in his forehead
 deepened angrily. “Business?” he demanded. “Yes, plenty of it. We’ve got
 to reduce expenses. We’re nigh onto $300 behind-hand this minute. Besides
 your house-rent, you get $800 free an’ clear⁠—that is $15.38 every
 week, an’ only you an’ your wife to keep out of it. Why, when I was your
 age, young man, and after that too, I was glad to get $4 a week.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “I don’t think my salary is under discussion, Mr. Pierce⁠—”
 </p>
 <p>
 “<em>Brother</em> Pierce!” suggested Winch, in a half-shuckling undertone.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Brother Pierce, then!” echoed Theron, impatiently. “The Quarterly
 Conference and the Estimating Committee deal with that. The trustees have
 no more to do with it than the man in the moon.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Come, come, Brother Ware,” put in Erastus Winch, “we mustn’t have no hard
 feelin’s. Brotherly love is what we’re all lookin’ after. Brother Pierce’s
 meanin’ wasn’t agin your drawin’ your full salary, every cent of it, only⁠—only
 there are certain little things connected with the parsonage here that we
 feel you ought to bear. F’r instance, there’s the new sidewalk we had to
 lay in front of the house here only a month ago. Of course, if the
 treasury was flush we wouldn’t say a word about it. An’ then there’s the
 gas bill here. Seein’ as you get your rent for nothin’, it don’t seem much
 to ask that you should see to lightin’ the place yourself.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “No, I don’t think that either is a proper charge upon me,” interposed
 Theron. “I decline to pay them.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “We can have the gas shut off,” remarked Brother Pierce, coldly.
 </p>
 <p>
 “As soon as you like,” responded the minister, sitting erect and tapping
 the carpet nervously with his foot. “Only you must understand that I will
 take the whole matter to the Quarterly Conference in July. I already see a
 good many other interesting questions about the financial management of
 this church which might be appropriately discussed there.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Oh, come, Brother Ware!” broke in Trustee Winch, with a somewhat agitated
 assumption of good-feeling. “Surely these are matters we ought to settle
 amongst ourselves. We never yet asked outsiders to meddle with our
 business here. It’s our motto, Brother Ware. I say, if you’ve got a motto,
 stand by it.”
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well, my motto,” said Theron, “is to be behaved decently to by those with
 whom I have to deal; and I also propose to stand by it.”
 </p>
 <p>
 Brother Pierce rose gingerly to his feet, with the hesitation of an old
 man not sure about his knees. When he had straightened himself, he put on
 his hat, and eyed the minister sternly from beneath its brim.
 </p>
 <p>
 “The Lord gives us crosses grievous to our natur’,” he said, “an’ we’re
 told to bear ’em cheerfully as long as they’re on our backs; but there
 ain’t nothin’ said agin our unloadin’ ’em in the ditch the minute we git
 the chance. I guess you won’t last here more ’n a twelvemonth.”
 </p>
 <p>
 He pulled his soft and discolored old hat down over his brows with a
 significantly hostile nod, and, turning, stumped toward the hall-door
 without offering to shake hands.
 </p>
 <p>
 The other trustees had risen likewise, in tacit recognition that the
 meeting was over. Winch clasped the minister’s hand in his own broad, hard
 palm, and squeezed it in an exuberant grip. “Don’t mind his little ways,
 Brother Ware,” he urged in a loud, unctuous whisper, with a grinning
 backward nod: “he’s a trifle skittish sometimes when you don’t give him
 free rein; but he’s all wool an’ a yard wide when it comes to right-down
 hard-pan religion. My love to Sister Ware;” and he followed the senior
 trustee into the hall.
 </p>
 <p>
 Mr. Gorringe had been tying up his books and papers. He came now with the
 bulky parcel under his arm, and his hat and stick in the other hand. He
 could give little but his thumb to Theron to shake. His face wore a grave
 expression, and not a line relaxed as, catching the minister’s look, he
 slowly covered his left eye in a deliberate wink.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Well?⁠—and how did it go off?” asked Alice, from where she knelt by
 the oven door, a few minutes later.
 </p>
 <p>
 For answer, Theron threw himself wearily into the big old farm
 rocking-chair on the other side of the stove, and shook his head with a
 lengthened sigh.
 </p>
 <p>
 “If it wasn’t for that man Gorringe of yours,” he said dejectedly, “I
 think I should feel like going off⁠—and learning a trade.”
 </p>
 
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
