<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII
</h3>
<p>
 At the command of Father Forbes, a lad who was loitering near them went
 down through the throng to the bar, and returned with three glasses of
 beer. It pleased the Rev. Mr. Ware that the priest should have taken it
 for granted that he would do as the others did. He knocked his glass
 against theirs in compliance with a custom strange to him, but which they
 seemed to understand very well. The beer itself was not so agreeable to
 the taste as he had expected, but it was cold and refreshing.
</p>
<p>
 When the boy had returned with the glasses, the three stood for a moment
 in silence, meditatively watching the curious scene spread below them.
 Beyond the bar, Theron could catch now through the trees regularly
 recurring glimpses of four or five swings in motion. These were nearest
 him, and clearest to the vision as well, at the instant when they reached
 their highest forward point. The seats were filled with girls, some of
 them quite grown young women, and their curving upward sweep through the
 air was disclosing at its climax a remarkable profusion of white skirts
 and black stockings. The sight struck him as indecorous in the extreme,
 and he turned his eyes away. They met Celia’s; and there was something
 latent in their brown depths which prompted him, after a brief dalliance
 of interchanging glances, to look again at the swings.
</p>
<p>
 “That old maid Curran is really too ridiculous, with those white stockings
 of hers,” remarked Celia; “some friend ought to tell her to dye them.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Or pad them,” suggested Father Forbes, with a gay little chuckle. “I
 daresay the question of swings and ladies’ stockings hardly arises with
 you, over at the camp-meeting, Mr. Ware?”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron laughed aloud at the conceit. “I should say not!” he replied.
</p>
<p>
 “I’m just dying to see a camp-meeting!” said Celia. “You hear such racy
 accounts of what goes on at them.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Don’t go, I beg of you!” urged Theron, with doleful emphasis. “Don’t
 let’s even talk about them. I should like to feel this afternoon as if
 there was no such thing within a thousand miles of me as a camp-meeting.
 Do you know, all this interests me enormously. It is a revelation to me to
 see these thousands of good, decent, ordinary people, just frankly
 enjoying themselves like human beings. I suppose that in this whole huge
 crowd there isn’t a single person who will mention the subject of his soul
 to any other person all day long.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I should think the assumption was a safe one,” said the priest,
 smilingly, “unless,” he added on afterthought, “it be by way of a genial
 profanity. There used to be some old Clare men who said ‘Hell to my soul!’
 when they missed at quoits, but I haven’t heard it for a long time. I
 daresay they’re all dead.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I shall never forget that death-bed⁠—where I saw you first,”
 remarked Theron, musingly. “I date from that experience a whole new life.
 I have been greatly struck lately, in reading our ‘Northern Christian
 Advocate’ to see in the obituary notices of prominent Methodists how over
 and over again it is recorded that they got religion in their youth
 through being frightened by some illness of their own, or some epidemic
 about them. The cholera year of 1832 seems to have made Methodists hand
 over fist. Even to this day our most successful revivalists, those who
 work conversions wholesale wherever they go, do it more by frightful
 pictures of hell-fire surrounding the sinner’s death-bed than anything
 else. You could hear the same thing at our camp-meeting tonight, if you
 were there.”
 </p>
<p>
 “There isn’t so much difference as you think,” said Father Forbes,
 dispassionately. “Your people keep examining their souls, just as children
 keep pulling up the bulbs they have planted to see are there any roots
 yet. Our people are more satisfied to leave their souls alone, once they
 have been planted, so to speak, by baptism. But fear of hell governs them
 both, pretty much alike. As I remember saying to you once before, there is
 really nothing new under the sun. Even the saying isn’t new. Though there
 seem to have been the most tremendous changes in races and civilizations
 and religions, stretching over many thousands of years, yet nothing is in
 fact altered very much. Where religions are concerned, the human race are
 still very like savages in a dangerous wood in the dark, telling one
 another ghost stories around a camp-fire. They have always been like
 that.”
 </p>
<p>
 “What nonsense!” cried Celia. “I have no patience with such gloomy
 rubbish. The Greeks had a religion full of beauty and happiness and
 light-heartedness, and they weren’t frightened of death at all. They made
 the image of death a beautiful boy, with a torch turned down. Their
 greatest philosophers openly preached and practised the doctrine of
 suicide when one was tired of life. Our own early Church was full of these
 broad and beautiful Greek ideas. You know that yourself! And it was only
 when your miserable Jeromes and Augustines and Cyrils brought in the
 abominable meannesses and cruelties of the Jewish Old Testament, and
 stamped out the sane and lovely Greek elements in the Church, that
 Christians became the poor, whining, cowardly egotists they are, troubling
 about their little tin-pot souls, and scaring themselves in their churches
 by skulls and crossbones.”
 </p>
<p>
 “My dear Celia,” interposed the priest, patting her shoulder gently, “we
 will have no Greek debate today. Mr. Ware has been permitted to taboo
 camp-meetings, and I claim the privilege to cry off on Greeks. Look at
 those fellows down there, trampling over one another to get more beer.
 What have they to do with Athens, or Athens with them? I take it, Mr. Ware,” he went on, with a grave face but a twinkling eye, “that what we
 are observing here in front of us is symbolical of a great ethical and
 theological revolution, which in time will modify and control the destiny
 of the entire American people. You see those young Irishmen there,
 struggling like pigs at a trough to get their fill of German beer. That
 signifies a conquest of Teuton over Kelt more important and far-reaching
 in its results than the landing of Hengist and Horsa. The Kelt has come to
 grief heretofore⁠—or at least been forced to play second fiddle to
 other races⁠—because he lacked the right sort of a drink. He has in
 his blood an excess of impulsive, imaginative, even fantastic qualities.
 It is much easier for him to make a fool of himself, to begin with, than
 it is for people of slower wits and more sluggish temperaments. When you
 add whiskey to that, or that essence of melancholia which in Ireland they
 call ‘porther,’ you get the Kelt at his very weakest and worst. These
 young men down there are changing all that. They have discovered lager.
 Already many of them can outdrink the Germans at their own beverage. The
 lager-drinking Irishman in a few generations will be a new type of
 humanity⁠—the Kelt at his best. He will dominate America. He will be
 THE American. And his church⁠—with the Italian element thrown clean
 out of it, and its Pope living, say, in Baltimore or Georgetown⁠—will
 be the Church of America.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Let us have some more lager at once,” put in Celia. “This revolution
 can’t be hurried forward too rapidly.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron could not feel sure how much of the priest’s discourse was in jest,
 how much in earnest. “It seems to me,” he said, “that as things are going,
 it doesn’t look much as if the America of the future will trouble itself
 about any kind of a church. The march of science must very soon produce a
 universal scepticism. It is in the nature of human progress. What all
 intelligent men recognize today, the masses must surely come to see in
 time.”
 </p>
<p>
 Father Forbes laughed outright this time. “My dear Mr. Ware,” he said, as
 they touched glasses again, and sipped the fresh beer that had been
 brought them, “of all our fictions there is none so utterly baseless and
 empty as this idea that humanity progresses. The savage’s natural
 impression is that the world he sees about him was made for him, and that
 the rest of the universe is subordinated to him and his world, and that
 all the spirits and demons and gods occupy themselves exclusively with him
 and his affairs. That idea was the basis of every pagan religion, and it
 is the basis of the Christian religion, simply because it is the
 foundation of human nature. That foundation is just as firm and unshaken
 today as it was in the Stone Age. It will always remain, and upon it will
 always be built some kind of a religious superstructure. ‘Intelligent
 men,’ as you call them, really have very little influence, even when they
 all pull one way. The people as a whole soon get tired of them. They give
 too much trouble. The most powerful forces in human nature are
 self-protection and inertia. The middle-aged man has found out that the
 chief wisdom in life is to bend to the pressures about him, to shut up and
 do as others do. Even when he thinks he has rid his own mind of
 superstitions, he sees that he will best enjoy a peaceful life by leaving
 other peoples’ superstitions alone. That is always the ultimate view of
 the crowd.”
 </p>
<p>
 “But I don’t see,” observed Theron, “granting that all this is true, how
 you think the Catholic Church will come out on top. I could understand it
 of Unitarianism, or Universalism, or the Episcopal Church, where nobody
 seems to have to believe particularly in anything except the beauty of its
 burial service, but I should think the very rigidity of the Catholic creed
 would make it impossible. There everything is hard and fast; nothing is
 elastic; there is no room for compromise.”
 </p>
<p>
 “The Church is always compromising,” explained the priest, “only it does
 it so slowly that no one man lives long enough to quite catch it at the
 trick. No; the great secret of the Catholic Church is that it doesn’t
 debate with sceptics. No matter what points you make against it, it is
 never betrayed into answering back. It simply says these things are sacred
 mysteries, which you are quite free to accept and be saved, or reject and
 be damned. There is something intelligible and fine about an attitude like
 that. When people have grown tired of their absurd and fruitless wrangling
 over texts and creeds which, humanly speaking, are all barbaric nonsense,
 they will come back to repose pleasantly under the Catholic roof, in that
 restful house where things are taken for granted. There the manners are
 charming, the service excellent, the decoration and upholstery most
 acceptable to the eye, and the music”⁠—he made a little mock bow here
 to Celia⁠—“the music at least is divine. There you have nothing to do
 but be agreeable, and avoid scandal, and observe the convenances. You are
 no more expected to express doubts about the Immaculate Conception than
 you are to ask the lady whom you take down to dinner how old she is. Now
 that is, as I have said, an intelligent and rational church for people to
 have. As the Irish civilize themselves⁠—you observe them diligently
 engaged in the process down below there⁠—and the social roughness of
 their church becomes softened and ameliorated, Americans will inevitably
 be attracted toward it. In the end, it will embrace them all, and be
 modified by them, and in turn influence their development, till you will
 have a new nation and a new national church, each representative of the
 other.”
 </p>
<p>
 “And all this is to be done by lager beer!” Theron ventured to comment,
 jokingly. He was conscious of a novel perspiration around the bridge of
 his nose, which was obviously another effect of the drink.
</p>
<p>
 The priest passed the pleasantry by. “No,” he said seriously; “what you
 must see is that there must always be a church. If one did not exist, it
 would be necessary to invent it. It is needed, first and foremost, as a
 police force. It is needed, secondly, so to speak, as a fire insurance. It
 provides the most even temperature and pure atmosphere for the growth of
 young children. It furnishes the best obtainable social machinery for
 marrying off one’s daughters, getting to know the right people, patching
 up quarrels, and so on. The priesthood earn their salaries as the agents
 for these valuable social arrangements. Their theology is thrown in as a
 sort of intellectual diversion, like the ritual of a benevolent
 organization. There are some who get excited about this part of it, just
 as one hears of Free-Masons who believe that the sun rises and sets to
 exemplify their ceremonies. Others take their duties more quietly, and,
 understanding just what it all amounts to, make the best of it, like you
 and me.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron assented to the philosophy and the compliment by a grave bow. “Yes,
 that is the idea⁠—to make the best of it,” he said, and fastened his
 regard boldly this time upon the swings.
</p>
<p>
 “We were both ordained by our bishops,” continued the priest, “at an age
 when those worthy old gentlemen would not have trusted our combined wisdom
 to buy a horse for them.”
 </p>
<p>
 “And I was married,” broke in Theron, with an eagerness almost vehement,
 “when I had only just been ordained! At the worst, YOU had only the Church
 fastened upon your back, before you were old enough to know what you
 wanted. It is easy enough to make the best of THAT, but it is different
 with me.”
 </p>
<p>
 A marked silence followed this outburst. The Rev. Mr. Ware had never
 spoken of his marriage to either of these friends before; and something in
 their manner seemed to suggest that they did not find the subject
 inviting, now that it had been broached. He himself was filled with a
 desire to say more about it. He had never clearly realized before what a
 genuine grievance it was. The moisture at the top of his nose merged
 itself into tears in the corners of his eyes, as the cruel enormity of the
 sacrifice he had made in his youth rose before him. His whole life had
 been fettered and darkened by it. He turned his gaze from the swings
 toward Celia, to claim the sympathy he knew she would feel for him.
</p>
<p>
 But Celia was otherwise engaged. A young man had come up to her⁠—a
 tall and extremely thin young man, soberly dressed, and with a long,
 gaunt, hollow-eyed face, the skin of which seemed at once florid and pale.
 He had sandy hair and the rough hands of a workman; but he was speaking to
 Miss Madden in the confidential tones of an equal.
</p>
<p>
 “I can do nothing at all with him,” this newcomer said to her. “He’ll not
 be said by me. Perhaps he’d listen to you!”
 </p>
<p>
 “It’s likely I’ll go down there!” said Celia. “He may do what he likes for
 all me! Take my advice, Michael, and just go your way, and leave him to
 himself. There was a time when I would have taken out my eyes for him, but
 it was love wasted and thrown away. After the warnings he’s had, if he
 WILL bring trouble on himself, let’s make it no affair of ours.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron had found himself exchanging glances of inquiry with this young
 man. “Mr. Ware,” said Celia, here, “let me introduce you to my brother
 Michael⁠—my full brother.”
 </p>
<p>
 Mr. Ware remembered him now, and began, in response to the other’s formal
 bow, to say something about their having met in the dark, inside the
 church. But Celia held up her hand. “I’m afraid, Mr. Ware,” she said
 hurriedly, “that you are in for a glimpse of the family skeleton. I will
 apologize for the infliction in advance.”
 </p>
<p>
 Wonderingly, Theron followed her look, and saw another young man who had
 come up the path from the crowd below, and was close upon them. The
 minister recognized in him a figure which had seemed to be the centre of
 almost every group about the bar that he had studied in detail. He was a
 small, dapper, elegantly attired youth, with dark hair, and the handsome,
 regularly carved face of an actor. He advanced with a smiling countenance
 and unsteady step⁠—his silk hat thrust back upon his head, his
 frock-coat and vest unbuttoned, and his neckwear disarranged⁠—and
 saluted the company with amiability.
</p>
<p>
 “I saw you up here, Father Forbes,” he said, with a thickened and erratic
 utterance. “Whyn’t you come down and join us? I’m setting ’em up for
 everybody. You got to take care of the boys, you know. I’ll blow in the
 last cent I’ve got in the world for the boys, every time, and they know
 it. They’re solider for me than they ever were for anybody. That’s how it
 is. If you stand by the boys, the boys’ll stand by you. I’m going to the
 Assembly for this district, and they ain’t nobody can stop me. The boys
 are just red hot for me. Wish you’d come down, Father Forbes, and address
 a few words to the meeting⁠—just mention that I’m a candidate, and
 say I’m bound to win, hands down. That’ll make you solid with the boys,
 and we’ll be all good fellows together. Come on down!”
 </p>
<p>
 The priest affably disengaged his arm from the clutch which the speaker
 had laid upon it, and shook his head in gentle deprecation. “No, no; you
 must excuse me, Theodore,” he said. “We mustn’t meddle in politics, you
 know.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Politics be damned!” urged Theodore, grabbing the priest’s other arm, and
 tugging at it stoutly to pull him down the path. “I say, boys” he shouted
 to those below, “here’s Father Forbes, and he’s going to come down and
 address the meeting. Come on, Father! Come down, and have a drink with the
 boys!”
 </p>
<p>
 It was Celia who sharply pulled his hand away from the priest’s arm this
 time. “Go away with you!” she snapped in low, angry tones at the intruder.
 “You should be ashamed of yourself! If you can’t keep sober yourself, you
 can at least keep your hands off the priest. I should think you’d have
 more decency, when you’re in such a state as this, than to come where I
 am. If you’ve no respect for yourself, you might have that much respect
 for me! And before strangers, too!
</p>
<p>
 “Oh, I mustn’t come where YOU are, eh?” remarked the peccant Theodore,
 straightening himself with an elaborate effort. “You’ve bought these
 woods, have you? I’ve got a hundred friends here, all the same, for every
 one you’ll ever have in your life, Red-head, and don’t you forget it.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Go and spend your money with them, then, and don’t come insulting decent
 people,” said Celia.
</p>
<p>
 “Before strangers, too!” the young man called out, with beery sarcasm.
 “Oh, we’ll take care of the strangers all right.” He had not seemed to be
 aware of Theron’s presence, much less his identity, before; but he turned
 to him now with a knowing grin. “I’m running for the Assembly, Mr. Ware,”
 he said, speaking loudly and with deliberate effort to avoid the drunken
 elisions and comminglings to which his speech tended, “and I want you to
 fix up the Methodists solid for me. I’m going to drive over to the
 camp-meeting tonight, me and some of the boys in a barouche, and I’ll put
 a twenty-dollar bill on their plate. Here it is now, if you want to see
 it.”
 </p>
<p>
 As the young man began fumbling in a vest-pocket, Theron gathered his wits
 together.
</p>
<p>
 “You’d better not go this evening,” he said, as convincingly as he knew
 how; “because the gates will be closed very early, and the
 Saturday-evening services are of a particularly special nature, quite
 reserved for those living on the grounds.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Rats!” said Theodore, raising his head, and abandoning the search for the
 bill. “Why don’t you speak out like a man, and say you think I’m too
 drunk?”
 </p>
<p>
 “I don’t think that is a question which need arise between us, Mr. Madden,” murmured Theron, confusedly.
</p>
<p>
 “Oh, don’t you make any mistake! A hell of a lot of questions arise
 between us, Mr. Ware,” cried Theodore, with a sudden accession of vigor in
 tone and mien. “And one of ’em is⁠—go away from me, Michael!⁠—one
 of ’em is, I say, why don’t you leave our girls alone? They’ve got their
 own priests to make fools of themselves over, without any sneak of a
 Protestant parson coming meddling round them. You’re a married man into
 the bargain; and you’ve got in your house this minute a piano that my
 sister bought and paid for. Oh, I’ve seen the entry in Thurston’s books!
 You have the cheek to talk to me about being drunk⁠—why⁠—”
 </p>
<p>
 These remarks were never concluded, for Father Forbes here clapped a hand
 abruptly over the offending mouth, and flung his free arm in a tight grip
 around the young man’s waist. “Come with me, Michael!” he said, and the
 two men led the reluctant and resisting Theodore at a sharp pace off into
 the woods.
</p>
<p>
 Theron and Celia stood and watched them disappear among the undergrowth.
 “It’s the dirty Foley blood that’s in him,” he heard her say, as if
 between clenched teeth.
</p>
<p>
 The girl’s big brown eyes, when Theron looked into them again, were still
 fixed upon the screen of foliage, and dilated like those of a Medusa mask.
 The blood had gone away, and left the fair face and neck as white, it
 seemed to him, as marble. Even her lips, fiercely bitten together,
 appeared colorless. The picture of consuming and powerless rage which she
 presented, and the shuddering tremor which ran over her form, as visible
 as the quivering track of a gust of wind across a pond, awed and
 frightened him.
</p>
<p>
 Tenderness toward her helpless state came too, and uppermost. He drew her
 arm into his, and turned their backs upon the picnic scene.
</p>
<p>
 “Let us walk a little up the path into the woods,” he said, “and get away
 from all this.”
 </p>
<p>
 “The further away the better,” she answered bitterly, and he felt the
 shiver run through her again as she spoke.
</p>
<p>
 The methodical waltz-music from that unseen dancing platform rose again
 above all other sounds. They moved up the woodland path, their steps
 insensibly falling into the rhythm of its strains, and vanished from sight
 among the trees.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
