<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI
</h3>
<p>
  Deliberate as his progress was, the diminishing number of store-fronts
  along the sidewalk, and the increasing proportion of picket-fences
  enclosing domestic lawns, forced upon Theron's attention the fact that he
  was nearing home. It was a trifle past the hour for his midday meal. He
  was not in the least hungry; still less did he feel any desire just now to
  sit about in that library living-room of his. Why should he go home at
  all? There was no reason whatever—save that Alice would be expecting
  him. Upon reflection, that hardly amounted to a reason. Wives, with their
  limited grasp of the realities of life, were always expecting their
  husbands to do things which it turned out not to be feasible for them to
  do. The customary male animal spent a considerable part of his life in
  explaining to his mate why it had been necessary to disappoint or upset
  her little plans for his comings and goings. It was in the very nature of
  things that it should be so.
</p>
<p>
  Sustained by these considerations, Mr. Ware slackened his steps, then
  halted irresolutely, and after a minute's hesitation, entered the small
  temperance restaurant before which, as by intuition, he had paused. The
  elderly woman who placed on the tiny table before him the tea and rolls he
  ordered, was entirely unknown to him, he felt sure, yet none the less she
  smiled at him, and spoke almost familiarly—“I suppose Mrs. Ware is
  at the seaside, and you are keeping bachelor's hall?”
 </p>
<p>
  “Not quite that,” he responded stiffly, and hurried through the meagre and
  distasteful repast, to avoid any further conversation.
</p>
<p>
  There was an idea underlying her remark, however, which recurred to him
  when he had paid his ten cents and got out on the street again. There was
  something interesting in the thought of Alice at the seaside. Neither of
  them had ever laid eyes on salt water, but Theron took for granted the
  most extravagant landsman's conception of its curative and invigorating
  powers. It was apparent to him that he was going to pay much greater
  attention to Alice's happiness and well-being in the future than he had
  latterly done. He had bought her, this very day, a superb new piano. He
  was going to simply insist on her having a hired girl. And this seaside
  notion—why, that was best of all.
</p>
<p>
  His fancy built up pleasant visions of her feasting her delighted eyes
  upon the marvel of a great ocean storm, or roaming along a beach strewn
  with wonderful marine shells, exhibiting an innocent joy in their beauty.
  The fresh sea-breeze blew through her hair, as he saw her in mind's eye,
  and brought the hardy flush of health back upon her rather pallid cheeks.
  He was prepared already hardly to know her, so robust and revivified would
  she have become, by the time he went down to the depot to meet her on her
  return.
</p>
<p>
  For his imagination stopped short of seeing himself at the seaside. It
  sketched instead pictures of whole weeks of solitary academic calm, alone
  with his books and his thoughts. The facts that he had no books, and that
  nobody dreamed of interfering with his thoughts, subordinated themselves
  humbly to his mood. The prospect, as he mused fondly upon it, expanded to
  embrace the priest's and the doctor's libraries; the thoughts which he
  longed to be alone with involved close communion with their thoughts. It
  could not but prove a season of immense mental stimulation and ethical
  broadening. It would have its lofty poetic and artistic side as well; the
  languorous melodies of Chopin stole over his revery, as he dwelt upon
  these things, and soft azure and golden lights modelled forth the
  exquisite outlines of tall marble forms.
</p>
<p>
  He opened the gate leading to Dr. Ledsmar's house. His walk had brought
  him quite out of the town, and up, by a broad main highway which yet took
  on all sorts of sylvan charms, to a commanding site on the hillside.
  Below, in the valley, lay Octavius, at one end half-hidden in factory
  smoke, at the other, where narrow bands of water gleamed upon the surface
  of a broad plain piled symmetrically with lumber, presenting an oddly
  incongruous suggestion of forest odors and the simplicity of the
  wilderness. In the middle distance, on gradually rising ground, stretched
  a wide belt of dense, artificial foliage, peeping through which tiled
  turrets and ornamented chimneys marked the polite residences of those who,
  though they neither stoked the furnace fires to the west, nor sawed the
  lumber on the east, lived in purple and fine linen from the profits of
  this toil. Nearer at hand, pastures with grazing cows on the one side of
  the road, and the nigh, weather-stained board fence of the race-course on
  the other, completed the jumble of primitive rusticity and urban
  complications characterizing the whole picture.
</p>
<p>
  Dr. Ledsmar's house, toward which Theron's impulses had been secretly
  leading him ever since Celia's parting remark about the rheumatism, was of
  that spacious and satisfying order of old-fashioned houses which men of
  leisure and means built for themselves while the early traditions of a
  sparse and contented homogeneous population were still strong in the
  Republic. There was a hospitable look about its wide veranda, its broad,
  low bulk, and its big, double front door, which did not fit at all with
  the sketch of a man-hating recluse that the doctor had drawn of himself.
</p>
<p>
  Theron had prepared his mind for the effect of being admitted by a
  Chinaman, and was taken somewhat aback when the door was opened by the
  doctor himself. His reception was pleasant enough, almost cordial, but the
  sense of awkwardness followed him into his host's inner room and rested
  heavily upon his opening speech.
</p>
<p>
  “I heard, quite by accident, that you were ill,” he said, laying aside his
  hat.
</p>
<p>
  “It's nothing at all,” replied Ledsmar. “Merely a stiff shoulder that I
  wear from time to time in memory of my father. It ought to be quite gone
  by nightfall. It was good of you to come, all the same. Sit down if you
  can find a chair. As usual, we are littered up to our eyes here. That's it—throw
  those things on the floor.”
 </p>
<p>
  Mr. Ware carefully deposited an armful of pamphlets on the rug at his
  feet, and sat down. Litter was indeed the word for what he saw about him.
  Bookcases, chairs, tables, the corners of the floor, were all buried deep
  under disorderly strata of papers, diagrams, and opened books. One could
  hardly walk about without treading on them. The dust which danced up into
  the bar of sunshine streaming in from the window, as the doctor stepped
  across to another chair, gave Theron new ideas about the value of Chinese
  servants.
</p>
<p>
  “I must thank you, first of all, doctor,” he began, “for your kindness in
  coming when I was ill. 'I was sick, and ye visited me.'”
 </p>
<p>
  “You mustn't think of it that way,” said Ledsmar; “your friend came for
  me, and of course I went; and gladly too. There was nothing that I could
  do, or that anybody could do. Very interesting man, that friend of yours.
  And his wife, too—both quite out of the common. I don't know when
  I've seen two such really genuine people. I should like to have known more
  of them. Are they still here?”
 </p>
<p>
  “They went yesterday,” Theron replied. His earlier shyness had worn off,
  and he felt comfortably at his ease. “I don't know,” he went on, “that the
  word 'genuine' is just what would have occurred to me to describe the
  Soulsbys. They are very interesting people, as you say—MOST
  interesting—and there was a time, I dare say, when I should have
  believed in their sincerity. But of course I saw them and their
  performance from the inside—like one on the stage of a theatre, you
  know, instead of in the audience, and—well, I understand things
  better than I used to.”
 </p>
<p>
  The doctor looked over his spectacles at him with a suggestion of inquiry
  in his glance, and Theron continued: “I had several long talks with her;
  she told me very frankly the whole story of her life—and and it was
  decidedly queer, I can assure you! I may say to you—you will
  understand what I mean—that since my talk with you, and the books
  you lent me, I see many things differently. Indeed, when I think upon it
  sometimes my old state of mind seems quite incredible to me. I can use no
  word for my new state short of illumination.”
 </p>
<p>
  Dr. Ledsmar continued to regard his guest with that calm, interrogatory
  scrutiny of his. He did not seem disposed to take up the great issue of
  illumination. “I suppose,” he said after a little, “no woman can come in
  contact with a priest for any length of time WITHOUT telling him the
  'story of her life,' as you call it. They all do it. The thing amounts to
  a law.”
 </p>
<p>
  The young minister's veins responded with a pleasurable thrill to the use
  of the word “priest” in obvious allusion to himself. “Perhaps in fairness
  I ought to explain,” he said, “that in her case it was only done in the
  course of a long talk about myself. I might say that it was by way of
  kindly warning to me. She saw how I had become unsettled in many—many
  of my former views—and she was nervous lest this should lead me to—to—”
 </p>
<p>
  “To throw up the priesthood,” the doctor interposed upon his hesitation.
  “Yes, I know the tribe. Why, my dear sir, your entire profession would
  have perished from the memory of mankind, if it hadn't been for women. It
  is a very curious subject. Lots of thinkers have dipped into it, but no
  one has gone resolutely in with a search-light and exploited the whole
  thing. Our boys, for instance, traverse in their younger years all the
  stages of the childhood of the race. They have terrifying dreams of awful
  monsters and giant animals of which they have never so much as heard in
  their waking hours; they pass through the lust for digging caves, building
  fires, sleeping out in the woods, hunting with bows and arrows—all
  remote ancestral impulses; they play games with stones, marbles, and so on
  at regular stated periods of the year which they instinctively know, just
  as they were played in the Bronze Age, and heaven only knows how much
  earlier. But the boy goes through all this, and leaves it behind him—so
  completely that the grown man feels himself more a stranger among boys of
  his own place who are thinking and doing precisely the things he thought
  and did a few years before, than he would among Kurds or Esquimaux. But
  the woman is totally different. She is infinitely more precocious as a
  girl. At an age when her slow brother is still stubbing along somewhere in
  the neolithic period, she has flown way ahead to a kind of mediaeval
  stage, or dawn of mediaevalism, which is peculiarly her own. Having got
  there, she stays there; she dies there. The boy passes her, as the
  tortoise did the hare. He goes on, if he is a philosopher, and lets her
  remain in the dark ages, where she belongs. If he happens to be a fool,
  which is customary, he stops and hangs around in her vicinity.”
 </p>
<p>
  Theron smiled. “We priests,” he said, and paused again to enjoy the words—“I
  suppose I oughtn't to inquire too closely just where we belong in the
  procession.”
 </p>
<p>
  “We are considering the question impersonally,” said the doctor. “First of
  all, what you regard as religion is especially calculated to attract
  women. They remain as superstitious today, down in the marrow of their
  bones, as they were ten thousand years ago. Even the cleverest of them are
  secretly afraid of omens, and respect auguries. Think of the broadest
  women you know. One of them will throw salt over her shoulder if she
  spills it. Another drinks money from her cup by skimming the bubbles in a
  spoon. Another forecasts her future by the arrangement of tea-grounds.
  They make the constituency to which an institution based on mysteries,
  miracles, and the supernatural generally, would naturally appeal.
  Secondly, there is the personality of the priest.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Yes,” assented Ware. There rose up before him, on the instant, the
  graceful, portly figure and strong, comely face of Father Forbes.
</p>
<p>
  “Women are not a metaphysical people. They do not easily follow
  abstractions. They want their dogmas and religious sentiments embodied in
  a man, just as they do their romantic fancies. Of course you Protestants,
  with your married clergy, see less of the effects of this than celibates
  do, but even with you there is a great deal in it. Why, the very
  institution of celibacy itself was forced upon the early Christian Church
  by the scandal of rich Roman ladies loading bishops and handsome priests
  with fabulous gifts until the passion for currying favor with women of
  wealth, and marrying them or wheedling their fortunes from them, debauched
  the whole priesthood. You should read your Jerome.”
 </p>
<p>
  “I will—certainly,” said the listener, resolving to remember the
  name and refer it to the old bookseller.
</p>
<p>
  “Well, whatever laws one sect or another makes, the woman's attitude
  toward the priest survives. She desires to see him surrounded by
  flower-pots and candles, to have him smelling of musk. She would like to
  curl his hair, and weave garlands in it. Although she is not learned
  enough to have ever heard of such things, she intuitively feels in his
  presence a sort of backwash of the old pagan sensuality and lascivious
  mysticism which enveloped the priesthood in Greek and Roman days. Ugh! It
  makes one sick!”
 </p>
<p>
  Dr. Ledsmar rose, as he spoke, and dismissed the topic with a dry little
  laugh. “Come, let me show you round a bit,” he said. “My shoulder is
  easier walking than sitting.”
 </p>
<p>
  “Have you never written a book yourself?” asked Theron, getting to his
  feet.
</p>
<p>
  “I have a thing on serpent-worship,” the scientist replied—“written
  years ago.”
 </p>
<p>
  “I can't tell you how I should enjoy reading it,” urged the other.
</p>
<p>
  The doctor laughed again. “You'll have to learn German, then, I 'm afraid.
  It is still in circulation in Germany, I believe, on its merits as a
  serious book. I haven't a copy of the edition in English. THAT was all
  exhausted by collectors who bought it for its supposed obscenity, like
  Burton's 'Arabian Nights.' Come this way, and I will show you my
  laboratory.”
 </p>
<p>
  They moved out of the room, and through a passage, Ledsmar talking as he
  led the way. “I took up that subject, when I was at college, by a curious
  chance. I kept a young monkey in my rooms, which had been born in
  captivity. I brought home from a beer hall—it was in Germany—some
  pretzels one night, and tossed one toward the monkey. He jumped toward it,
  then screamed and ran back shuddering with fright. I couldn't understand
  it at first. Then I saw that the curled pretzel, lying there on the floor,
  was very like a little coiled-up snake. The monkey had never seen a snake,
  but it was in his blood to be afraid of one. That incident changed my
  whole life for me. Up to that evening, I had intended to be a lawyer.”
 </p>
<p>
  Theron did not feel sure that he had understood the point of the anecdote.
  He looked now, without much interest, at some dark little tanks containing
  thick water, a row of small glass cases with adders and other lesser
  reptiles inside, and a general collection of boxes, jars, and similar
  receptacles connected with the doctor's pursuits. Further on was a smaller
  chamber, with a big empty furnace, and shelves bearing bottles and
  apparatus like a drugstore.
</p>
<p>
  It was pleasanter in the conservatory—a low, spacious structure with
  broad pathways between the plants, and an awning over the sunny side of
  the roof. The plants were mostly orchids, he learned. He had read of them,
  but never seen any before. No doubt they were curious; but he discovered
  nothing to justify the great fuss made about them. The heat grew
  oppressive inside, and he was glad to emerge into the garden. He paused
  under the grateful shade of a vine-clad trellis, took off his hat, and
  looked about him with a sigh of relief. Everything seemed old-fashioned
  and natural and delightfully free from pretence in the big, overgrown
  field of flowers and shrubs.
</p>
<p>
  Theron recalled with some surprise Celia's indictment of the doctor as a
  man with no poetry in his soul. “You must be extremely fond of flowers,”
   he remarked.
</p>
<p>
  Dr. Ledsmar shrugged his well shoulder. “They have their points,” he said
  briefly. “These are all dioecious here. Over beyond are monoecious
  species. My work is to test the probabilities for or against Darwin's
  theory that hermaphroditism in plants is a late by-product of these
  earlier forms.”
 </p>
<p>
  “And is his theory right?” asked Mr. Ware, with a polite show of interest.
</p>
<p>
  “We may know in the course of three or four hundred years,” replied
  Ledsmar. He looked up into his guest's face with a quizzical half-smile.
  “That is a very brief period for observation when such a complicated
  question as sex is involved,” he added. “We have been studying the female
  of our own species for some hundreds of thousands of years, and we haven't
  arrived at the most elementary rules governing her actions.”
 </p>
<p>
  They had moved along to a bed of tall plants, the more forward of which
  were beginning to show bloom. “Here another task will begin next month,”
   the doctor observed. “These are salvias, pentstemons, and antirrhinums, or
  snapdragons, planted very thick for the purpose. Humble-bees bore holes
  through their base, to save the labor of climbing in and out of the
  flowers, and we don't quite know yet why some hive-bees discover and
  utilize these holes at once, while others never do. It may be merely the
  old-fogy conservatism of the individual, or there may be a law in it.”
 </p>
<p>
  These seemed very paltry things for a man of such wisdom to bother his
  head about. Theron looked, as he was bidden, at the rows of hives shining
  in the hot sun on a bench along the wall, but offered no comment beyond a
  casual, “My mother was always going to keep bees, but somehow she never
  got around to it. They say it pays very well, though.”
 </p>
<p>
  “The discovery of the reason why no bee will touch the nectar of the
  EPIPACTIS LATIFOLIA, though it is sweet to our taste, and wasps are greedy
  for it, WOULD pay,” commented the doctor. “Not like a blue rhododendron,
  in mere money, but in recognition. Lots of men have achieved a half-column
  in the 'Encyclopedia Britannica' on a smaller basis than that.”
 </p>
<p>
  They stood now at the end of the garden, before a small, dilapidated
  summer-house. On the bench inside, facing him, Theron saw a strange
  recumbent figure stretched at full length, apparently sound asleep, or it
  might be dead. Looking closer, with a startled surprise, he made out the
  shaven skull and outlandish garb of a Chinaman. He turned toward his guide
  in the expectation of a scene.
</p>
<p>
  The doctor had already taken out a note-book and pencil, and was drawing
  his watch from his pocket. He stepped into the summer-house, and, lifting
  the Oriental's limp arm, took account of his pulse. Then, with head bowed
  low, side-wise, he listened for the heart-action. Finally, he somewhat
  brusquely pushed back one of the Chinaman's eyelids, and made a minute
  inspection of what the operation disclosed. Returning to the light, he
  inscribed some notes in his book, put it back in his pocket, and came out.
  In answer to Theron's marvelling stare, he pointed toward a pipe of odd
  construction lying on the floor beneath the sleeper.
</p>
<p>
  “This is one of my regular afternoon duties,” he explained, again with the
  whimsical half-smile. “I am increasing his dose monthly by regular stages,
  and the results promise to be rather remarkable. Heretofore, observations
  have been made mostly on diseased or morbidly deteriorated subjects. This
  fellow of mine is strong as an ox, perfectly nourished, and watched over
  intelligently. He can assimilate opium enough to kill you and me and every
  other vertebrate creature on the premises, without turning a hair, and he
  hasn't got even fairly under way yet.”
 </p>
<p>
  The thing was unpleasant, and the young minister turned away. They walked
  together up the path toward the house. His mind was full now of the
  hostile things which Celia had said about the doctor. He had vaguely
  sympathized with her then, upon no special knowledge of his own. Now he
  felt that his sentiments were vehemently in accord with hers. The doctor
  WAS a beast.
</p>
<p>
  And yet—as they moved slowly along through the garden the thought
  took sudden shape in his mind—it would be only justice for him to
  get also the doctor's opinion of Celia. Even while they offended and
  repelled him, he could not close his eyes to the fact that the doctor's
  experiments and occupations were those of a patient and exact man of
  science—a philosopher. And what he had said about women—there
  was certainly a great deal of acumen and shrewd observation in that. If he
  would only say what he really thought about Celia, and about her relations
  with the priest! Yes, Theron recognized now there was nothing else that he
  so much needed light upon as those puzzling ties between Celia and Father
  Forbes.
</p>
<p>
  He paused, with a simulated curiosity, about one of the flower-beds.
  “Speaking of women and religion”—he began, in as casual a tone as he
  could command—“I notice curiously enough in my own case, that as I
  develop in what you may call the—the other direction, my wife, who
  formerly was not especially devote, is being strongly attracted by the
  most unthinking and hysterical side of—of our church system.”
 </p>
<p>
  The doctor looked at him, nodded, and stooped to nip some buds from a
  stalk in the bed.
</p>
<p>
  “And another case,” Theron went on—“of course it was all so new and
  strange to me—but the position which Miss Madden seems to occupy
  about the Catholic Church here—I suppose you had her in mind when
  you spoke.”
 </p>
<p>
  Ledsmar stood up. “My mind has better things to busy itself with than mad
  asses of that description,” he replied. “She is not worth talking about—a
  mere bundle of egotism, ignorance, and red-headed lewdness. If she were
  even a type, she might be worth considering; but she is simply an abnormal
  sport, with a little brain addled by notions that she is like Hypatia, and
  a large impudence rendered intolerable by the fact that she has money. Her
  father is a decent man. He ought to have her whipped.”
 </p>
<p>
  Mr. Ware drew himself erect, as he listened to these outrageous words. It
  would be unmanly, he felt, to allow such comments upon an absent friend to
  pass unrebuked. Yet there was the courtesy due to a host to be considered.
  His mind, fluttering between these two extremes, alighted abruptly upon a
  compromise. He would speak so as to show his disapproval, yet not so as to
  prevent his finding out what he wanted to know. The desire to hear Ledsmar
  talk about Celia and the priest seemed now to have possessed him for a
  long time, to have dictated his unpremeditated visit out here, to have
  been growing in intensity all the while he pretended to be interested in
  orchids and bees and the drugged Chinaman. It tugged passionately at his
  self-control as he spoke.
</p>
<p>
  “I cannot in the least assent to your characterization of the lady,” he
  began with rhetorical dignity.
</p>
<p>
  “Bless me!” interposed the doctor, with deceptive cheerfulness, “that is
  not required of you at all. It is a strictly personal opinion, offered
  merely as a contribution to the general sum of hypotheses.”
 </p>
<p>
  “But,” Theron went on, feeling his way, “of course, I gathered that
  evening that you had prejudices in the matter; but these are rather apart
  from the point I had in view. We were speaking, you will remember, of the
  traditional attitude of women toward priests—wanting to curl their
  hair and put flowers in it, you know, and that suggested to me some
  individual illustrations, and it occurred to me to wonder just what were
  the relations between Miss Madden and—and Father Forbes. She said
  this morning, for instance—I happened to meet her, quite by accident—that
  she was going to the church to practise a new piece, and that she could
  have Father Forbes to herself all day. Now that would be quite an
  impossible remark in our—that is, in any Protestant circles—and
  purely as a matter of comparison, I was curious to ask you just how much
  there was in it. I ask you, because going there so much you have had
  exceptional opportunities for—”
 </p>
<p>
  A sharp exclamation from his companion interrupted the clergyman's
  hesitating monologue. It began like a high-pitched, violent word, but
  dwindled suddenly into a groan of pain. The doctor's face, too, which had
  on the flash of Theron's turning seemed given over to unmixed anger, took
  on an expression of bodily suffering instead.
</p>
<p>
  “My shoulder has grown all at once excessively painful,” he said hastily.
  “I'm afraid I must ask you to excuse me, Mr. Ware.”
 </p>
<p>
  Carrying the afflicted side with ostentatious caution, he led the way
  without ado round the house to the front gate on the road. He had put his
  left hand under his coat to press it against his aching shoulder, and his
  right hung palpably helpless. This rendered it impossible for him to shake
  hands with his guest in parting.
</p>
<p>
  “You're sure there's nothing I can do,” said Theron, lingering on the
  outer side of the gate. “I used to rub my father's shoulders and back; I'd
  gladly—”
 </p>
<p>
  “Oh, not for worlds!” groaned the doctor. His anguish was so impressive
  that Theron, as he walked down the road, quite missed the fact that there
  had been no invitation to come again.
</p>
<p>
  Dr. Ledsmar stood for a minute or two, his gaze meditatively following the
  retreating figure. Then he went in, opening the front door with his right
  hand, and carrying himself once more as if there were no such thing as
  rheumatism in the world. He wandered on through the hall into the
  laboratory, and stopped in front of the row of little tanks full of water.
</p>
<p>
  Some deliberation was involved in whatever his purpose might be, for he
  looked from one tank to another with a pondering, dilatory gaze. At last
  he plunged his hand into the opaque fluid and drew forth a long, slim,
  yellowish-green lizard, with a coiling, sinuous tail and a pointed, evil
  head. The reptile squirmed and doubled itself backward around his wrist,
  darting out and in with dizzy swiftness its tiny forked tongue.
</p>
<p>
  The doctor held the thing up to the light, and, scrutinizing it through
  his spectacles, nodded his head in sedate approval. A grim smile curled in
  his beard.
</p>
<p>
  “Yes, you are the type,” he murmured to it, with evident enjoyment in the
  conceit. “Your name isn't Johnny any more. It's the Rev. Theron Ware.”
 </p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
