<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII
</h3>
<p>
 It was early afternoon when Theron walked out of his yard, bestowing no
 glance upon the withered and tarnished show of the garden, and started
 with a definite step down the street. The tendency to ruminative
 loitering, which those who saw him abroad always associated with his tall,
 spare figure, was not suggested today. He moved forward like a man with a
 purpose.
</p>
<p>
 All the forenoon in the seclusion of the sitting-room, with a book opened
 before him, he had been thinking hard. It was not the talk with Alice that
 occupied his thoughts. That rose in his mind from time to time, only as a
 disagreeable blur, and he refused to dwell upon it. It was nothing to him,
 he said to himself, what Gorringe’s motives in lying had been. As for
 Alice, he hardened his heart against her. Just now it was her mood to try
 and make up to him. But it had been something different yesterday, and who
 could say what it would be tomorrow? He really had passed the limit of
 patience with her shifting emotional vagaries, now lurching in this
 direction, now in that. She had had her chance to maintain a hold upon his
 interest and imagination, and had let it slip. These were the accidents of
 life, the inevitable harsh happenings in the great tragedy of Nature. They
 could not be helped, and there was nothing more to be said.
</p>
<p>
 He had bestowed much more attention upon what the priest had said the
 previous evening. He passed in review all the glowing tributes Father
 Forbes had paid to Celia. They warmed his senses as he recalled them, but
 they also, in a curious, indefinite way, caused him uneasiness. There had
 been a personal fervor about them which was something more than priestly.
 He remembered how the priest had turned pale and faltered when the
 question whether Celia would escape the general doom of her family came
 up. It was not a merely pastoral agitation that, he felt sure.
</p>
<p>
 A hundred obscure hints, doubts, stray little suspicions, crowded upward
 together in his thoughts. It became apparent to him now that from the
 outset he had been conscious of something queer⁠—yes, from that very
 first day when he saw the priest and Celia together, and noted their
 glance of recognition inside the house of death. He realized now, upon
 reflection, that the tone of other people, his own parishioners and his
 casual acquaintances in Octavius alike, had always had a certain note of
 reservation in it when it touched upon Miss Madden. Her running in and out
 of the pastorate at all hours, the way the priest patted her on the
 shoulder before others, the obvious dislike the priest’s ugly old
 housekeeper bore her, the astonishing freedom of their talk with each
 other⁠—these dark memories loomed forth out of a mass of sinister
 conjecture.
</p>
<p>
 He could bear the uncertainty no longer. Was it indeed not entirely his
 own fault that it had existed thus long? No man with the spirit of a mouse
 would have shilly-shallied in this preposterous fashion, week after week,
 with the fever of a beautiful woman’s kiss in his blood, and the woman
 herself living only round the corner. The whole world had been as good as
 offered to him⁠—a bewildering world of wealth and beauty and
 spiritual exaltation and love⁠—and he, like a weak fool, had waited
 for it to be brought to him on a salver, as it were, and actually forced
 upon his acceptance! “That is my failing,” he reflected; “these miserable
 ecclesiastical bandages of mine have dwarfed my manly side. The meanest of
 Thurston’s clerks would have shown a more adventurous spirit and a bolder
 nerve. If I do not act at once, with courage and resolution, everything
 will be lost. Already she must think me unworthy of the honor it was in
 her sweet will to bestow.” Then he remembered that she was now always at
 home. “Not another hour of foolish indecision!” he whispered to himself.
 “I will put my destiny to the test. I will see her today!”
 </p>
<p>
 A middle-aged, plain-faced servant answered his ring at the door-bell of
 the Madden mansion. She was palpably Irish, and looked at him with a
 saddened preoccupation in her gray eyes, holding the door only a little
 ajar.
</p>
<p>
 Theron had got out one of his cards. “I wish to make inquiry about young
 Mr. Madden⁠—Mr. Michael Madden,” he said, holding the card forth
 tentatively. “I have only just heard of his illness, and it has been a
 great grief to me.”
 </p>
<p>
 “He is no better,” answered the woman, briefly.
</p>
<p>
 “I am the Rev. Mr. Ware,” he went on, “and you may say that, if he is well
 enough, I should be glad to see him.”
 </p>
<p>
 The servant peered out at him with a suddenly altered expression, then
 shook her head. “I don’t think he would be wishing to see YOU,” she
 replied. It was evident from her tone that she suspected the visitor’s
 intentions.
</p>
<p>
 Theron smiled in spite of himself. “I have not come as a clergyman,” he
 explained, “but as a friend of the family. If you will tell Miss Madden
 that I am here, it will do just as well. Yes, we won’t bother him. If you
 will kindly hand my card to his sister.”
 </p>
<p>
 When the domestic turned at this and went in, Theron felt like throwing
 his hat in the air, there where he stood. The woman’s churlish sectarian
 prejudices had played ideally into his hands. In no other imaginable way
 could he have asked for Celia so naturally. He wondered a little that a
 servant at such a grand house as this should leave callers standing on the
 doorstep. Still more he wondered what he should say to the lady of his
 dream when he came into her presence.
</p>
<p>
 “Will you please to walk this way?” The woman had returned. She closed the
 door noiselessly behind him, and led the way, not up the sumptuous
 staircase, as Theron had expected, but along through the broad hall, past
 several large doors, to a small curtained archway at the end. She pushed
 aside this curtain, and Theron found himself in a sort of conservatory,
 full of the hot, vague light of sunshine falling through ground-glass. The
 air was moist and close, and heavy with the smell of verdure and wet
 earth. A tall bank of palms, with ferns sprawling at their base, reared
 itself directly in front of him. The floor was of mosaic, and he saw now
 that there were rugs upon it, and that there were chairs and sofas, and
 other signs of habitation. It was, indeed, only half a greenhouse, for the
 lower part of it was in rosewood panels, with floral paintings on them,
 like a room.
</p>
<p>
 Moving to one side of the barrier of palms, he discovered, to his great
 surprise, the figure of Michael, sitting propped up with pillows in a huge
 easy-chair. The sick man was looking at him with big, gravely intent eyes.
 His face did not show as much change as Theron had in fancy pictured. It
 had seemed almost as bony and cadaverous on the day of the picnic. The
 hands spread out on the chair-arms were very white and thin, though, and
 the gaze in the blue eyes had a spectral quality which disturbed him.
</p>
<p>
 Michael raised his right hand, and Theron, stepping forward, took it
 limply in his for an instant. Then he laid it down again. The touch of
 people about to die had always been repugnant to him. He could feel on his
 own warm palm the very damp of the grave.
</p>
<p>
 “I only heard from Father Forbes last evening of your⁠—your
 ill-health,” he said, somewhat hesitatingly. He seated himself on a bench
 beneath the palms, facing the invalid, but still holding his hat. “I hope
 very sincerely that you will soon be all right again.”
 </p>
<p>
 “My sister is lying down in her room,” answered Michael. He had not once
 taken his sombre and embarrassing gaze from the other’s face. The voice in
 which he uttered this uncalled-for remark was thin in fibre, cold and
 impassive. It fell upon Theron’s ears with a suggestion of hidden meaning.
 He looked uneasily into Michael’s eyes, and then away again. They seemed
 to be looking straight through him, and there was no shirking the
 sensation that they saw and comprehended things with an unnatural
 prescience.
</p>
<p>
 “I hope she is feeling better,” Theron found himself saying. “Father
 Forbes mentioned that she was a little under the weather. I dined with him
 last night.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I am glad that you came,” said Michael, after a little pause. His
 earnest, unblinking eyes seemed to supplement his tongue with speech of
 their own. “I do be thinking a great deal about you. I have matters to
 speak of to you, now that you are here.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron bowed his head gently, in token of grateful attention. He tried the
 experiment of looking away from Michael, but his glance went back again
 irresistibly, and fastened itself upon the sick man’s gaze, and clung
 there.
</p>
<p>
 “I am next door to a dead man,” he went on, paying no heed to the other’s
 deprecatory gesture. “It is not years or months with me, but weeks. Then I
 go away to stand up for judgment on my sins, and if it is His merciful
 will, I shall see God. So I say my good-byes now, and so you will let me
 speak plainly, and not think ill of what I say. You are much changed, Mr. Ware, since you came to Octavius, and it is not a change for the good.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron lifted his brows in unaffected surprise, and put inquiry into his
 glance.
</p>
<p>
 “I don’t know if Protestants will be saved, in God’s good time, or not,”
 continued Michael. “I find there are different opinions among the clergy
 about that, and of course it is not for me, only a plain mechanic, to be
 sure where learned and pious scholars are in doubt. But I am sure about
 one thing. Those Protestants, and others too, mind you, who profess and
 preach good deeds, and themselves do bad deeds⁠—they will never be
 saved. They will have no chance at all to escape hell-fire.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I think we are all agreed upon that, Mr. Madden,” said Theron, with
 surface suavity.
</p>
<p>
 “Then I say to you, Mr. Ware, you are yourself in a bad path. Take the
 warning of a dying man, sir, and turn from it!”
 </p>
<p>
 The impulse to smile tugged at Theron’s facial muscles. This was really
 too droll. He looked up at the ceiling, the while he forced his
 countenance into a polite composure, then turned again to Michael, with
 some conciliatory commonplace ready for utterance. But he said nothing,
 and all suggestion of levity left his mind, under the searching inspection
 bent upon him by the young man’s hollow eyes. What did Michael suspect?
 What did he know? What was he hinting at, in this strange talk of his?
</p>
<p>
 “I saw you often on the street when first you came here,” continued
 Michael. “I knew the man who was here before you⁠—that is, by sight⁠—and
 he was not a good man. But your face, when you came, pleased me. I liked
 to look at you. I was tormented just then, do you see, that so many
 decent, kindly people, old school-mates and friends and neighbors of mine⁠—and,
 for that matter, others all over the country must lose their souls because
 they were Protestants. At my boyhood and young manhood, that thought took
 the joy out of me. Sometimes I usen’t to sleep a whole night long, for
 thinking that some lad I had been playing with, perhaps in his own house,
 that very day, would be taken when he died, and his mother too, when she
 died, and thrown into the flames of hell for all eternity. It made me so
 unhappy that finally I wouldn’t go to any Protestant boy’s house, and have
 his mother be nice to me, and give me cake and apples⁠—and me
 thinking all the while that they were bound to be damned, no matter how
 good they were to me.”
 </p>
<p>
 The primitive humanity of this touched Theron, and he nodded approbation
 with a tender smile in his eyes, forgetting for the moment that a personal
 application of the monologue had been hinted at.
</p>
<p>
 “But then later, as I grew up,” the sick man went on, “I learned that it
 was not altogether certain. Some of the authorities, I found, maintained
 that it was doubtful, and some said openly that there must be salvation
 possible for good people who lived in ignorance of the truth through no
 fault of their own. Then I had hope one day, and no hope the next, and as
 I did my work I thought it over, and in the evenings my father and I
 talked it over, and we settled nothing of it at all. Of course, how could
 we?”
 </p>
<p>
 “Did you ever discuss the question with your sister?” it occurred suddenly
 to Theron to interpose. He was conscious of some daring in doing so, and
 he fancied that Michael’s drawn face clouded a little at his words.
</p>
<p>
 “My sister is no theologian,” he answered briefly. “Women have no call to
 meddle with such matters. But I was saying⁠—it was in the middle of
 these doubtings of mine that you came here to Octavius, and I noticed you
 on the streets, and once in the evening⁠—I made no secret of it to my
 people⁠—I sat in the back of your church and heard you preach. As I
 say, I liked you. It was your face, and what I thought it showed of the
 man underneath it, that helped settle my mind more than anything else. I
 said to myself: ‘Here is a young man, only about my own age, and he has
 education and talents, and he does not seek to make money for himself, or
 a great name, but he is content to live humbly on the salary of a
 book-keeper, and devote all his time to prayer and the meditation of his
 religion, and preaching, and visiting the sick and the poor, and
 comforting them. His very face is a pleasure and a help for those in
 suffering and trouble to look at. The very sight of it makes one believe
 in pure thoughts and merciful deeds. I will not credit it that God intends
 damning such a man as that, or any like him!’ ”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron bowed, with a slow, hesitating gravity of manner, and deep, not
 wholly complacent, attention on his face. Evidently all this was by way of
 preparation for something unpleasant.
</p>
<p>
 “That was only last spring,” said Michael. His tired voice sank for a
 sentence or two into a meditative half-whisper. “And it was MY last spring
 of all. I shall not be growing weak any more, or drawing hard breaths,
 when the first warm weather comes. It will be one season to me hereafter,
 always the same.” He lifted his voice with perceptible effort. “I am
 talking too much. The rest I can say in a word. Only half a year has gone
 by, and you have another face on you entirely. I had noticed the small
 changes before, one by one. I saw the great change, all of a sudden, the
 day of the picnic. I see it a hundred times more now, as you sit there. If
 it seemed to me like the face of a saint before, it is more like the face
 of a bar-keeper now!”
 </p>
<p>
 This was quite too much. Theron rose, flushed to the temples, and scowled
 down at the helpless man in the chair. He swallowed the sharp words which
 came uppermost, and bit and moistened his lips as he forced himself to
 remember that this was a dying man, and Celia’s brother, to whom she was
 devoted, and whom he himself felt he wanted to be very fond of. He got the
 shadow of a smile on to his countenance.
</p>
<p>
 “I fear you HAVE tired yourself unduly,” he said, in as non-contentious a
 tone as he could manage. He even contrived a little deprecatory laugh. “I
 am afraid your real quarrel is with the air of Octavius. It agrees with me
 so wonderfully⁠—I am getting as fat as a seal. But I do hope I am not
 paying for it by such a wholesale deterioration inside. If my own opinion
 could be of any value, I should assure you that I feel myself an
 infinitely better and broader and stronger man than I was when I came
 here.”
 </p>
<p>
 Michael shook his head dogmatically. “That is the greatest pity of all,”
 he said, with renewed earnestness. “You are entirely deceived about
 yourself. You do not at all realize how you have altered your direction,
 or where you are going. It was a great misfortune for you, sir, that you
 did not keep among your own people. That poor half-brother of mine, though
 the drink was in him when he said that same to you, never spoke a truer
 word. Keep among your own people, Mr. Ware! When you go among others⁠—you
 know what I mean⁠—you have no proper understanding of what their
 sayings and doings really mean. You do not realize that they are held up
 by the power of the true Church, as a little child learning to walk is
 held up with a belt by its nurse. They can say and do things, and no harm
 at all come to them, which would mean destruction to you, because they
 have help, and you are walking alone. And so be said by me, Mr. Ware! Go
 back to the way you were brought up in, and leave alone the people whose
 ways are different from yours. You are a married man, and you are the
 preacher of a religion, such as it is. There can be nothing better for you
 than to go and strive to be a good husband, and to set a good example to
 the people of your Church, who look up to you⁠—and mix yourself up no
 more with outside people and outside notions that only do you mischief.
 And that is what I wanted to say to you.”
 </p>
<p>
 Theron took up his hat. “I take in all kindness what you have felt it your
 duty to say to me, Mr. Madden,” he said. “I am not sure that I have
 altogether followed you, but I am very sure you mean it well.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I mean well by you,” replied Michael, wearily moving his head on the
 pillow, and speaking in an undertone of languor and pain, “and I mean well
 by others, that are nearer to me, and that I have a right to care more
 about. When a man lies by the site of his open grave, he does not be
 meaning ill to any human soul.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Yes⁠—thanks⁠—quite so!” faltered Theron. He dallied for an
 instant with the temptation to seek some further explanation, but the
 sight of Michael’s half-closed eyes and worn-out expression decided him
 against it. It did not seem to be expected, either, that he should shake
 hands, and with a few perfunctory words of hope for the invalid’s
 recovery, which fell with a jarring note of falsehood upon his own ears,
 he turned and left the room. As he did so, Michael touched a bell on the
 table beside him.
</p>
<p>
 Theron drew a long breath in the hall, as the curtain fell behind him. It
 was an immense relief to escape from the oppressive humidity and heat of
 the flower-room, and from that ridiculous bore of a Michael as well.
</p>
<p>
 The middle-aged, grave-faced servant, warned by the bell, stood waiting to
 conduct him to the door.
</p>
<p>
 “I am sorry to have missed Miss Madden,” he said to her. “She must be
 quite worn out. Perhaps later in the day⁠—”
 </p>
<p>
 “She will not be seeing anybody today,” returned the woman. “She is going
 to New York this evening, and she is taking some rest against the
 journey.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Will she be away long?” he asked mechanically. The servant’s answer, “I
 have no idea,” hardly penetrated his consciousness at all.
</p>
<p>
 He moved down the steps, and along the gravel to the street, in a maze of
 mental confusion. When he reached the sidewalk, under the familiar elms,
 he paused, and made a definite effort to pull his thoughts together, and
 take stock of what had happened, of what was going to happen; but the
 thing baffled him. It was as if some drug had stupefied his faculties.
</p>
<p>
 He began to walk, and gradually saw that what he was thinking about was
 the fact of Celia’s departure for New York that evening. He stared at this
 fact, at first in its nakedness, then clothed with reassuring suggestions
 that this was no doubt a trip she very often made. There was a blind sense
 of comfort in this idea, and he rested himself upon it. Yes, of course,
 she travelled a great deal. New York must be as familiar to her as
 Octavius was to him. Her going there now was quite a matter of course⁠—the
 most natural thing in the world.
</p>
<p>
 Then there burst suddenly uppermost in his mind the other fact⁠—that
 Father Forbes was also going to New York that evening. The two things
 spindled upward, side by side, yet separately, in his mental vision; then
 they twisted and twined themselves together. He followed their
 convolutions miserably, walking as if his eyes were shut.
</p>
<p>
 In slow fashion matters defined and arranged themselves before him. The
 process of tracing their sequence was all torture, but there was no
 possibility, no notion, of shirking any detail of the pain. The priest had
 spoken of his efforts to persuade Celia to go away for a few days, for
 rest and change of air and scene. He must have known only too well that
 she was going, but of that he had been careful to drop no hint. The
 possibility of accident was too slight to be worth considering. People on
 such intimate terms as Celia and the priest⁠—people with such
 facilities for seeing each other whenever they desired⁠—did not find
 themselves on the same train of cars, with the same long journey in view,
 by mere chance.
</p>
<p>
 Theron walked until dusk began to close in upon the autumn day. It grew
 colder, as he turned his face homeward. He wondered if it would freeze
 again over-night, and then remembered the shrivelled flowers in his wife’s
 garden. For a moment they shaped themselves in a picture before his mind’s
 eye; he saw their blackened foliage, their sicklied, drooping stalks, and
 wilted blooms, and as he looked, they restored themselves to the vigor and
 grace and richness of color of summer-time, as vividly as if they had been
 painted on a canvas. Or no, the picture he stared at was not on canvas,
 but on the glossy, varnished panel of a luxurious sleeping-car. He shook
 his head angrily and blinked his eyes again and again, to prevent their
 seeing, seated together in the open window above this panel, the two
 people he knew were there, gloved and habited for the night’s journey,
 waiting for the train to start.
</p>
<p>
 “Very much to my surprise,” he found himself saying to Alice, watching her
 nervously as she laid the supper-table, “I find I must go to Albany
 tonight. That is, it isn’t absolutely necessary, for that matter, but I
 think it may easily turn out to be greatly to my advantage to go.
 Something has arisen⁠—I can’t speak about it as yet⁠—but the
 sooner I see the Bishop about it the better. Things like that occur in a
 man’s life, where boldly striking out a line of action, and following it
 up without an instant’s delay, may make all the difference in the world to
 him. Tomorrow it might be too late; and, besides, I can be home the sooner
 again.”
 </p>
<p>
 Alice’s face showed surprise, but no trace of suspicion. She spoke with
 studied amiability during the meal, and deferred with such unexpected tact
 to his implied desire not to be questioned as to the mysterious motives of
 the journey, that his mood instinctively softened and warmed toward her,
 as they finished supper.
</p>
<p>
 He smiled a little. “I do hope I shan’t have to go on tomorrow to New
 York; but these Bishops of ours are such gad-abouts one never knows where
 to catch them. As like as not Sanderson may be down in New York, on
 Book-Concern business or something; and if he is, I shall have to chase
 him up. But, after all, perhaps the trip will do me good⁠—the change
 of air and scene, you know.”
 </p>
<p>
 “I’m sure I hope so,” said Alice, honestly enough. “If you do go on to New
 York, I suppose you’ll go by the river-boat. Everybody talks so much of
 that beautiful sail down the Hudson.”
 </p>
<p>
 “That’s an idea!” exclaimed Theron, welcoming it with enthusiasm. “It
 hadn’t occurred to me. If I do have to go, and it is as lovely as they
 make out, the next time I promise I won’t go without you, my girl. I HAVE
 been rather out of sorts lately,” he continued. “When I come back, I
 daresay I shall be feeling better, more like my old self. Then I’m going
 to try, Alice, to be nicer to you than I have been of late. I’m afraid
 there was only too much truth in what you said this morning.”
 </p>
<p>
 “Never mind what I said this morning⁠—or any other time,” broke in
 Alice, softly. “Don’t ever remember it again, Theron, if only⁠—only⁠—”
 </p>
<p>
 He rose as she spoke, moved round the table to where she sat, and, bending
 over her, stopped the faltering sentence with a kiss. When was it, he
 wondered, that he had last kissed her? It seemed years, ages, ago.
</p>
<p>
 An hour later, with hat and overcoat on, and his valise in his hand, he
 stood on the doorstep of the parsonage, and kissed her once more before he
 turned and descended into the darkness. He felt like whistling as his feet
 sounded firmly on the plank sidewalk beyond the gate. It seemed as if he
 had never been in such capital good spirits before in his life.
</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
