<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV
 </h3>
 <p>
 On the following Sunday, young Mrs. Ware sat alone in the preacher’s pew
 through the morning service, and everybody noted that the roses had been
 taken from her bonnet. In the evening she was absent, and after the
 doxology and benediction several people, under the pretence of solicitude
 for her health, tried to pump her husband as to the reason. He answered
 their inquiries civilly enough, but with brevity: she had stayed at home
 because she did not feel like coming out⁠—this and nothing more.
 </p>
 <p>
 The congregation dispersed under a gossip-laden cloud of consciousness
 that there must be something queer about Sister Ware. There was a
 tolerably general agreement, however, that the two sermons of the day had
 been excellent. Not even Loren Pierce’s railing commentary on the pastor’s
 introduction of an outlandish word like “epitome”⁠—clearly forbidden
 by the Discipline’s injunction to plain language understood of the people⁠—availed
 to sap the satisfaction of the majority.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron himself comprehended that he had pleased the bulk of his auditors;
 the knowledge left him curiously hot and cold. On the one hand, there was
 joy in the apparent prospect that the congregation would back him up in a
 stand against the trustees, if worst came to worst. But, on the other
 hand, the bonnet episode entered his soul. It had been a source of bitter
 humiliation to him to see his wife sitting there beneath the pulpit, shorn
 by despotic order of the adornments natural to her pretty head. But he had
 even greater pain in contemplating the effect it had produced on Alice
 herself. She had said not a word on the subject, but her every glance and
 gesture seemed to him eloquent of deep feeling about it. He made sure that
 she blamed him for having defended his own gas and sidewalk rights with
 successful vigor, but permitted the sacrifice of her poor little
 inoffensive roses without a protest. In this view of the matter, indeed,
 he blamed himself. Was it too late to make the error good? He ventured a
 hint on this Sunday evening, when he returned to the parsonage and found
 her reading an old weekly newspaper by the light of the kitchen lamp, to
 the effect that he fancied there would be no great danger in putting those
 roses back into her bonnet. Without lifting her eyes from the paper, she
 answered that she had no earthly desire to wear roses in her bonnet, and
 went on with her reading.
 </p>
 <p>
 At breakfast the next morning Theron found himself in command of an
 unusual fund of humorous good spirits, and was at pains to make the most
 of it, passing whimsical comments on subjects which the opening day
 suggested, recalling quaint and comical memories of the past, and striving
 his best to force Alice into a laugh. Formerly her merry temper had always
 ignited at the merest spark of gayety. Now she gave his jokes only a
 dutiful half-smile, and uttered scarcely a word in response to his running
 fire of talk. When the meal was finished, she went silently to work to
 clear away the dishes.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron turned over in his mind the project of offering to help her, as he
 had done so often in those dear old days when they laughingly began life
 together. Something decided this project in the negative for him, and
 after lingering moments he put on his hat and went out for a walk.
 </p>
 <p>
 Not even the most doleful and trying hour of his bitter experience in Tyre
 had depressed him like this. Looking back upon these past troubles, he
 persuaded himself that he had borne them all with a light and cheerful
 heart, simply because Alice had been one with him in every thought and
 emotion. How perfect, how ideally complete, their sympathy had always
 been! With what absolute unity of mind and soul they had trod that
 difficult path together! And now⁠—henceforth⁠—was it to be
 different? The mere suggestion of such a thing chilled his veins. He said
 aloud to himself as he walked that life would be an intolerable curse if
 Alice were to cease sharing it with him in every conceivable phase.
 </p>
 <p>
 He had made his way out of town, and tramped along the country hill-road
 for a considerable distance, before a merciful light began to lessen the
 shadows in the picture of gloom with which his mind tortured itself. All
 at once he stopped short, lifted his head, and looked about him. The broad
 valley lay warm and tranquil in the May sunshine at his feet. In the
 thicket up the side-hill above him a gray squirrel was chattering shrilly,
 and the birds sang in a tireless choral confusion. Theron smiled, and drew
 a long breath. The gay clamor of the woodland songsters, the placid
 radiance of the landscape, were suddenly taken in and made a part of his
 new mood. He listened, smiled once more, and then started in a leisurely
 way back toward Octavius.
 </p>
 <p>
 How could he have been so ridiculous as to fancy that Alice⁠—his
 Alice⁠—had been changed into someone else? He marvelled now at his
 own perverse folly. She was overworked⁠—tired out⁠—that was all.
 The task of moving in, of setting the new household to rights, had been
 too much for her. She must have a rest. They must get in a hired girl.
 </p>
 <p>
 Once this decision about a servant fixed itself in the young minister’s
 mind, it drove out the last vestage of discomfort. He strode along now in
 great content, revolving idly a dozen different plans for gilding and
 beautifying this new life of leisure into which his sanguine thoughts
 projected Alice. One of these particularly pleased him, and waxed in
 definiteness as he turned it over and over. He would get another piano for
 her, in place of that which had been sacrificed in Tyre. That beneficient
 modern invention, the instalment plan, made this quite feasible⁠—so
 easy, in fact, that it almost seemed as if he should find his wife playing
 on the new instrument when he got home. He would stop in at the music
 store and see about it that very day.
 </p>
 <p>
 Of course, now that these important resolutions had been taken, it would
 be a good thing if he could do something to bring in some extra money.
 This was by no means a new notion. He had mused over the possibility in a
 formless way ever since that memorable discovery of indebtedness in Tyre,
 and had long ago recognized the hopelessness of endeavor in every channel
 save that of literature. Latterly his fancy had been stimulated by reading
 an account of the profits which Canon Farrar had derived from his “Life of
 Christ.” If such a book could command such a bewildering multitude of
 readers, Theron felt there ought to be a chance for him. So clear did
 constant rumination render this assumption that the young pastor in time
 had come to regard this prospective book of his as a substantial asset,
 which could be realized without trouble whenever he got around to it.
 </p>
 <p>
 He had not, it is true, gone to the length of seriously considering what
 should be the subject of his book. That had not seemed to him to matter
 much, so long as it was scriptural. Familiarity with the process of
 extracting a fixed amount of spiritual and intellectual meat from any
 casual text, week after week, had given him an idea that any one of many
 subjects would do, when the time came for him to make a choice. He
 realized now that the time for a selection had arrived, and almost
 simultaneously found himself with a ready-made decision in his mind. The
 book should be about Abraham!
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron Ware was extremely interested in the mechanism of his own brain,
 and followed its workings with a lively curiosity. Nothing could be more
 remarkable, he thought, than to thus discover that, on the instant of his
 formulating a desire to know what he should write upon, lo, and behold!
 there his mind, quite on its own initiative, had the answer waiting for
 him! When he had gone a little further, and the powerful range of
 possibilities in the son’s revolt against the idolatry of his father, the
 image-maker, in the exodus from the unholy city of Ur, and in the
 influence of the new nomadic life upon the little deistic family group,
 had begun to unfold itself before him, he felt that the hand of Providence
 was plainly discernible in the matter. The book was to be blessed from its
 very inception.
 </p>
 <p>
 Walking homeward briskly now, with his eyes on the sidewalk and his mind
 all aglow with crowding suggestions for the new work, and impatience to be
 at it, he came abruptly upon a group of men and boys who occupied the
 whole path, and were moving forward so noiselessly that he had not heard
 them coming. He almost ran into the leader of this little procession, and
 began a stammering apology, the final words of which were left unspoken,
 so solemnly heedless of him and his talk were all the faces he saw.
 </p>
 <p>
 In the centre of the group were four working-men, bearing between them an
 extemporized litter of two poles and a blanket hastily secured across them
 with spikes. Most of what this litter held was covered by another blanket,
 rounded in coarse folds over a shapeless bulk. From beneath its farther
 end protruded a big broom-like black beard, thrown upward at such an angle
 as to hide everything beyond to those in front. The tall young minister,
 stepping aside and standing tip-toe, could see sloping downward behind
 this hedge of beard a pinched and chalk-like face, with wide-open, staring
 eyes. Its lips, of a dull lilac hue, were moving ceaselessly, and made a
 dry, clicking sound.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron instinctively joined himself to those who followed the litter⁠—a
 motley dozen of street idlers, chiefly boys. One of these in whispers
 explained to him that the man was one of Jerry Madden’s workmen in the
 wagon-shops, who had been deployed to trim an elm-tree in front of his
 employer’s house, and, being unused to such work, had fallen from the top
 and broken all his bones. They would have cared for him at Madden’s house,
 but he had insisted upon being taken home. His name was MacEvoy, and he
 was Joey MacEvoy’s father, and likewise Jim’s and Hughey’s and Martin’s.
 After a pause the lad, a bright-eyed, freckled, barefooted wee Irishman,
 volunteered the further information that his big brother had run to bring
 “Father Forbess,” on the chance that he might be in time to administer
 “extry munction.”
 </p>
 <p>
 The way of the silent little procession led through back streets⁠—where
 women hanging up clothes in the yards hurried to the gates, their aprons
 full of clothes-pins, to stare open-mouthed at the passers-by⁠—and
 came to a halt at last in an irregular and muddy lane, before one of a
 half dozen shanties reared among the ash-heaps and debris of the town’s
 most bedraggled outskirts.
 </p>
 <p>
 A stout, middle-aged, red-armed woman, already warned by some messenger of
 calamity, stood waiting on the roadside bank. There were whimpering
 children clinging to her skirts, and a surrounding cluster of women of the
 neighborhood, some of the more elderly of whom, shrivelled little crones
 in tidy caps, and with their aprons to their eyes, were beginning in a
 low-murmured minor the wail which presently should rise into the keen of
 death. Mrs. MacEvoy herself made no moan, and her broad ruddy face was
 stern in expression rather than sorrowful. When the litter stopped beside
 her, she laid a hand for an instant on her husband’s wet brow, and looked⁠—one
 could have sworn impassively⁠—into his staring eyes. Then, still
 without a word, she waved the bearers toward the door, and led the way
 herself.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron, somewhat wonderingly, found himself, a minute later, inside a dark
 and ill-smelling room, the air of which was humid with the steam from a
 boiler of clothes on the stove, and not in other ways improved by the
 presence of a jostling score of women, all straining their gaze upon the
 open door of the only other apartment⁠—the bed-chamber. Through this
 they could see the workmen laying MacEvoy on the bed, and standing
 awkwardly about thereafter, getting in the way of the wife and old Maggie
 Quirk as they strove to remove the garments from his crushed limbs. As the
 neighbors watched what could be seen of these proceedings, they whispered
 among themselves eulogies of the injured man’s industry and good temper,
 his habit of bringing his money home to his wife, and the way he kept his
 Father Mathew pledge and attended to his religious duties. They admitted
 freely that, by the light of his example, their own husbands and sons left
 much to be desired, and from this wandered easily off into domestic
 digressions of their own. But all the while their eyes were bent upon the
 bedroom door; and Theron made out, after he had grown accustomed to the
 gloom and the smell, that many of them were telling their beads even while
 they kept the muttered conversation alive. None of them paid any attention
 to him, or seemed to regard his presence there as unusual.
 </p>
 <p>
 Presently he saw enter through the sunlit street doorway a person of a
 different class. The bright light shone for a passing instant upon a
 fashionable, flowered hat, and upon some remarkably brilliant shade of red
 hair beneath it. In another moment there had edged along through the
 throng, to almost within touch of him, a tall young woman, the owner of
 this hat and wonderful hair. She was clad in light and pleasing spring
 attire, and carried a parasol with a long oxidized silver handle of a
 quaint pattern. She looked at him, and he saw that her face was of a
 lengthened oval, with a luminous rose-tinted skin, full red lips, and big
 brown, frank eyes with heavy auburn lashes. She made a grave little
 inclination of her head toward him, and he bowed in response. Since her
 arrival, he noted, the chattering of the others had entirely ceased.
 </p>
 <p>
 “I followed the others in, in the hope that I might be of some
 assistance,” he ventured to explain to her in a low murmur, feeling that
 at last here was some one to whom an explanation of his presence in this
 Romish house was due. “I hope they won’t feel that I have intruded.”
 </p>
 <p>
 She nodded her head as if she quite understood. “They’ll take the will for
 the deed,” she whispered back. “Father Forbes will be here in a minute. Do
 you know is it too late?”
 </p>
 <p>
 Even as she spoke, the outer doorway was darkened by the commanding bulk
 of a newcomer’s figure. The flash of a silk hat, and the deferential way
 in which the assembled neighbors fell back to clear a passage, made his
 identity clear. Theron felt his blood tingle in an unaccustomed way as
 this priest of a strange church advanced across the room⁠—a
 broad-shouldered, portly man of more than middle height, with a shapely,
 strong-lined face of almost waxen pallor, and a firm, commanding tread. He
 carried in his hands, besides his hat, a small leather-bound case. To this
 and to him the women courtesied and bowed their heads as he passed.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Come with me,” whispered the tall girl with the parasol to Theron; and he
 found himself pushing along in her wake until they intercepted the priest
 just outside the bedroom door. She touched Father Forbes on the arm.
 </p>
 <p>
 “Just to tell you that I am here,” she said. The priest nodded with a
 grave face, and passed into the other room. In a minute or two the
 workmen, Mrs. MacEvoy, and her helper came out, and the door was shut
 behind them.
 </p>
 <p>
 “He is making his confession,” explained the young lady. “Stay here for a
 minute.”
 </p>
 <p>
 She moved over to where the woman of the house stood, glum-faced and
 tearless, and whispered something to her. A confused movement among the
 crowd followed, and out of it presently resulted a small table, covered
 with a white cloth, and bearing on it two unlighted candles, a basin of
 water, and a spoon, which was brought forward and placed in readiness
 before the closed door. Some of those nearest this cleared space were
 kneeling now, and murmuring a low buzz of prayer to the click of beads on
 their rosaries.
 </p>
 <p>
 The door opened, and Theron saw the priest standing in the doorway with an
 uplifted hand. He wore now a surplice, with a purple band over his
 shoulders, and on his pale face there shone a tranquil and tender light.
 </p>
 <p>
 One of the workmen fetched from the stove a brand, lighted the two
 candles, and bore the table with its contents into the bedroom. The young
 woman plucked Theron’s sleeve, and he dumbly followed her into the chamber
 of death, making one of the group of a dozen, headed by Mrs. MacEvoy and
 her children, which filled the little room, and overflowed now outward to
 the street door. He found himself bowing with the others to receive the
 sprinkled holy water from the priest’s white fingers; kneeling with the
 others for the prayers; following in impressed silence with the others the
 strange ceremonial by which the priest traced crosses of holy oil with his
 thumb upon the eyes, ears, nostrils, lips, hands, and feet of the dying
 man, wiping off the oil with a piece of cotton-batting each time after he
 had repeated the invocation to forgiveness for that particular sense. But
 most of all he was moved by the rich, novel sound of the Latin as the
 priest rolled it forth in the ASPERGES ME, DOMINE, and MISEREATUR VESTRI
 OMNIPOTENS DEUS, with its soft Continental vowels and liquid R’s. It
 seemed to him that he had never really heard Latin before. Then the
 astonishing young woman with the red hair declaimed the CONFITEOR,
 vigorously and with a resonant distinctness of enunciation. It was a
 different Latin, harsher and more sonorous; and while it still dominated
 the murmured undertone of the other’s prayers, the last moment came.
 </p>
 <p>
 Theron had stood face to face with death at many other bedsides; no other
 final scene had stirred him like this. It must have been the girl’s Latin
 chant, with its clanging reiteration of the great names⁠—BEATUM
 MICHAELEM ARCHANGELUM, BEATUM JOANNEM BAPTISTAM, SANCTOS APOSTOLOS PETRUM
 ET PAULUM⁠—invoked with such proud confidence in this squalid little
 shanty, which so strangely affected him.
 </p>
 <p>
 He came out with the others at last⁠—the candles and the folded hands
 over the crucifix left behind⁠—and walked as one in a dream. Even by
 the time that he had gained the outer doorway, and stood blinking at the
 bright light and filling his lungs with honest air once more, it had begun
 to seem incredible to him that he had seen and done all this.
 </p>
 
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
