<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I
    </h3>
    <p>
      No such throng had ever before been seen in the building during all its
      eight years of existence. People were wedged together most uncomfortably
      upon the seats; they stood packed in the aisles and overflowed the
      galleries; at the back, in the shadows underneath these galleries, they
      formed broad, dense masses about the doors, through which it would be
      hopeless to attempt a passage.
    </p>
    <p>
      The light, given out from numerous tin-lined circles of flaring gas-jets
      arranged on the ceiling, fell full upon a thousand uplifted faces—some
      framed in bonnets or juvenile curls, others bearded or crowned with
      shining baldness—but all alike under the spell of a dominant emotion
      which held features in abstracted suspense and focussed every eye upon a
      common objective point.
    </p>
    <p>
      The excitement of expectancy reigned upon each row of countenances, was
      visible in every attitude—nay, seemed a part of the close,
      overheated atmosphere itself.
    </p>
    <p>
      An observer, looking over these compact lines of faces and noting the
      uniform concentration of eagerness they exhibited, might have guessed that
      they were watching for either the jury's verdict in some peculiarly
      absorbing criminal trial, or the announcement of the lucky numbers in a
      great lottery. These two expressions seemed to alternate, and even to
      mingle vaguely, upon the upturned lineaments of the waiting throng—the
      hope of some unnamed stroke of fortune and the dread of some adverse
      decree.
    </p>
    <p>
      But a glance forward at the object of this universal gaze would have
      sufficed to shatter both hypotheses. Here was neither a court of justice
      nor a tombola. It was instead the closing session of the annual Nedahma
      Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and the Bishop was about to
      read out the list of ministerial appointments for the coming year. This
      list was evidently written in a hand strange to him, and the slow,
      near-sighted old gentleman, having at last sufficiently rubbed the glasses
      of his spectacles, and then adjusted them over his nose with annoying
      deliberation, was now silently rehearsing his task to himself—the
      while the clergymen round about ground their teeth and restlessly shuffled
      their feet in impatience.
    </p>
    <p>
      Upon a closer inspection of the assemblage, there were a great many of
      these clergymen. A dozen or more dignified, and for the most part elderly,
      brethren sat grouped about the Bishop in the pulpit. As many others, not
      quite so staid in mien, and indeed with here and there almost a suggestion
      of frivolity in their postures, were seated on the steps leading down from
      this platform. A score of their fellows sat facing the audience, on chairs
      tightly wedged into the space railed off round the pulpit; and then came
      five or six rows of pews, stretching across the whole breadth of the
      church, and almost solidly filled with preachers of the Word.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were very old men among these—bent and decrepit veterans who
      had known Lorenzo Dow, and had been ordained by elders who remembered
      Francis Asbury and even Whitefield. They sat now in front places, leaning
      forward with trembling and misshapen hands behind their hairy ears,
      waiting to hear their names read out on the superannuated list, it might
      be for the last time.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sight of these venerable Fathers in Israel was good to the eyes,
      conjuring up, as it did, pictures of a time when a plain and homely people
      had been served by a fervent and devoted clergy—by preachers who
      lacked in learning and polish, no doubt, but who gave their lives without
      dream of earthly reward to poverty and to the danger and wearing toil of
      itinerant missions through the rude frontier settlements. These pictures
      had for their primitive accessories log-huts, rough household implements,
      coarse clothes, and patched old saddles which told of weary years of
      journeying; but to even the least sympathetic vision there shone upon them
      the glorified light of the Cross and Crown. Reverend survivors of the
      heroic times, their very presence there—sitting meekly at the
      altar-rail to hear again the published record of their uselessness and of
      their dependence upon church charity—was in the nature of a
      benediction.
    </p>
    <p>
      The large majority of those surrounding these patriarchs were middle-aged
      men, generally of a robust type, with burly shoulders, and bushing beards
      framing shaven upper lips, and who looked for the most part like honest
      and prosperous farmers attired in their Sunday clothes. As exceptions to
      this rule, there were scattered stray specimens of a more urban class,
      worthies with neatly trimmed whiskers, white neckcloths, and even
      indications of hair-oil—all eloquent of citified charges; and now
      and again the eye singled out a striking and scholarly face, at once
      strong and simple, and instinctively referred it to the faculty of one of
      the several theological seminaries belonging to the Conference.
    </p>
    <p>
      The effect of these faces as a whole was toward goodness, candor, and
      imperturbable self-complacency rather than learning or mental astuteness;
      and curiously enough it wore its pleasantest aspect on the countenances of
      the older men. The impress of zeal and moral worth seemed to diminish by
      regular gradations as one passed to younger faces; and among the very
      beginners, who had been ordained only within the past day or two, this
      decline was peculiarly marked. It was almost a relief to note the relative
      smallness of their number, so plainly was it to be seen that they were not
      the men their forbears had been.
    </p>
    <p>
      And if those aged, worn-out preachers facing the pulpit had gazed instead
      backward over the congregation, it may be that here too their old eyes
      would have detected a difference—what at least they would have
      deemed a decline.
    </p>
    <p>
      But nothing was further from the minds of the members of the First M. E.
      Church of Tecumseh than the suggestion that they were not an improvement
      on those who had gone before them. They were undoubtedly the smartest and
      most important congregation within the limits of the Nedahma Conference,
      and this new church edifice of theirs represented alike a scale of outlay
      and a standard of progressive taste in devotional architecture unique in
      the Methodism of that whole section of the State. They had a right to be
      proud of themselves, too. They belonged to the substantial order of the
      community, with perhaps not so many very rich men as the Presbyterians
      had, but on the other hand with far fewer extremely poor folk than the
      Baptists were encumbered with. The pews in the first four rows of their
      church rented for one hundred dollars apiece—quite up to the
      Presbyterian highwater mark—and they now had almost abolished free
      pews altogether. The oyster suppers given by their Ladies' Aid Society in
      the basement of the church during the winter had established rank among
      the fashionable events in Tecumseh's social calendar.
    </p>
    <p>
      A comprehensive and satisfied perception of these advantages was uppermost
      in the minds of this local audience, as they waited for the Bishop to
      begin his reading. They had entertained this Bishop and his Presiding
      Elders, and the rank and file of common preachers, in a style which could
      not have been remotely approached by any other congregation in the
      Conference. Where else, one would like to know, could the Bishop have been
      domiciled in a Methodist house where he might have a sitting-room all to
      himself, with his bedroom leading out of it? Every clergyman present had
      been provided for in a private residence—even down to the Licensed
      Exhorters, who were not really ministers at all when you came to think of
      it, and who might well thank their stars that the Conference had assembled
      among such open-handed people. There existed a dim feeling that these
      Licensed Exhorters—an uncouth crew, with country store-keepers and
      lumbermen and even a horse-doctor among their number—had taken
      rather too much for granted, and were not exhibiting quite the proper
      degree of gratitude over their reception.
    </p>
    <p>
      But a more important issue hung now imminent in the balance—was
      Tecumseh to be fairly and honorably rewarded for her hospitality by being
      given the pastor of her choice?
    </p>
    <p>
      All were agreed—at least among those who paid pew-rents—upon
      the great importance of a change in the pulpit of the First M. E. Church.
      A change in persons must of course take place, for their present pastor
      had exhausted the three-year maximum of the itinerant system, but there
      was needed much more than that. For a handsome and expensive church
      building like this, and with such a modern and go-ahead congregation, it
      was simply a vital necessity to secure an attractive and fashionable
      preacher. They had held their own against the Presbyterians these past few
      years only by the most strenuous efforts, and under the depressing
      disadvantage of a minister who preached dreary out-of-date sermons, and
      who lacked even the most rudimentary sense of social distinctions. The
      Presbyterians had captured the new cashier of the Adams County Bank, who
      had always gone to the Methodist Church in the town he came from, but now
      was lost solely because of this tiresome old fossil of theirs; and there
      were numerous other instances of the same sort, scarcely less grievous.
      That this state of things must be altered was clear.
    </p>
    <p>
      The unusually large local attendance upon the sessions of the Conference
      had given some of the more guileless of visiting brethren a high notion of
      Tecumseh's piety; and perhaps even the most sophisticated stranger never
      quite realized how strictly it was to be explained by the anxiety to pick
      out a suitable champion for the fierce Presbyterian competition. Big
      gatherings assembled evening after evening to hear the sermons of those
      selected to preach, and the church had been almost impossibly crowded at
      each of the three Sunday services. Opinions had naturally differed a good
      deal during the earlier stages of this scrutiny, but after last night's
      sermon there could be but one feeling. The man for Tecumseh was the
      Reverend Theron Ware.
    </p>
    <p>
      The choice was an admirable one, from points of view much more exalted
      than those of the local congregation.
    </p>
    <p>
      You could see Mr. Ware sitting there at the end of the row inside the
      altar-rail—the tall, slender young man with the broad white brow,
      thoughtful eyes, and features moulded into that regularity of strength
      which used to characterize the American Senatorial type in those far-away
      days of clean-shaven faces and moderate incomes before the War. The
      bright-faced, comely, and vivacious young woman in the second side pew was
      his wife—and Tecumseh noted with approbation that she knew how to
      dress. There were really no two better or worthier people in the building
      than this young couple, who sat waiting along with the rest to hear their
      fate. But unhappily they had come to know of the effort being made to
      bring them to Tecumseh; and their simple pride in the triumph of the
      husband's fine sermon had become swallowed up in a terribly anxious
      conflict of hope and fear. Neither of them could maintain a satisfactory
      show of composure as the decisive moment approached. The vision of
      translation from poverty and obscurity to such a splendid post as this—truly
      it was too dazzling for tranquil nerves.
    </p>
    <p>
      The tedious Bishop had at last begun to call his roll of names, and the
      good people of Tecumseh mentally ticked them off, one by one, as the list
      expanded. They felt that it was like this Bishop—an unimportant and
      commonplace figure in Methodism, not to be mentioned in the same breath
      with Simpson and Janes and Kingsley—that he should begin with the
      backwoods counties, and thrust all these remote and pitifully rustic
      stations ahead of their own metropolitan charge. To these they listened
      but listlessly—indifferent alike to the joy and to the dismay which
      he was scattering among the divines before him.
    </p>
    <p>
      The announcements were being doled out with stumbling hesitation. After
      each one a little half-rustling movement through the crowded rows of
      clergymen passed mute judgment upon the cruel blow this brother had
      received, the reward justly given to this other, the favoritism by which a
      third had profited. The Presiding Elders, whose work all this was, stared
      with gloomy and impersonal abstraction down upon the rows of blackcoated
      humanity spread before them. The ministers returned this fixed and
      perfunctory gaze with pale, set faces, only feebly masking the emotions
      which each new name stirred somewhere among them. The Bishop droned on
      laboriously, mispronouncing words and repeating himself as if he were
      reading a catalogue of unfamiliar seeds.
    </p>
    <p>
      “First church of Tecumseh—Brother Abram G. Tisdale!”
     </p>
    <p>
      There was no doubt about it! These were actually the words that had been
      uttered. After all this outlay, all this lavish hospitality, all this
      sacrifice of time and patience in sitting through those sermons, to draw
      from the grab-bag nothing better than—a Tisdale!
    </p>
    <p>
      A hum of outraged astonishment—half groan, half wrathful snort
      bounded along from pew to pew throughout the body of the church. An echo
      of it reached the Bishop, and so confused him that he haltingly repeated
      the obnoxious line. Every local eye turned as by intuition to where the
      calamitous Tisdale sat, and fastened malignantly upon him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Could anything be worse? This Brother Tisdale was past fifty—a
      spindling, rickety, gaunt old man, with a long horse-like head and
      vacantly solemn face, who kept one or the other of his hands continually
      fumbling his bony jaw. He had been withdrawn from routine service for a
      number of years, doing a little insurance canvassing on his own account,
      and also travelling for the Book Concern. Now that he wished to return to
      parochial work, the richest prize in the whole list, Tecumseh, was given
      to him—to him who had never been asked to preach at a Conference,
      and whose archaic nasal singing of “Greenland's Icy Mountains” had made
      even the Licensed Exhorters grin! It was too intolerably dreadful to think
      of!
    </p>
    <p>
      An embittered whisper to the effect that Tisdale was the Bishop's cousin
      ran round from pew to pew. This did not happen to be true, but indignant
      Tecumseh gave it entire credit. The throngs about the doors dwindled as by
      magic, and the aisles cleared. Local interest was dead; and even some of
      the pewholders rose and made their way out. One of these murmured audibly
      to his neighbors as he departed that HIS pew could be had now for sixty
      dollars.
    </p>
    <p>
      So it happened that when, a little later on, the appointment of Theron
      Ware to Octavius was read out, none of the people of Tecumseh either noted
      or cared. They had been deeply interested in him so long as it seemed
      likely that he was to come to them—before their clearly expressed
      desire for him had been so monstrously ignored. But now what became of him
      was no earthly concern of theirs.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the Doxology had been sung and the Conference formally declared
      ended, the Wares would fain have escaped from the flood of handshakings
      and boisterous farewells which spread over the front part of the church.
      But the clergymen were unusually insistent upon demonstrations of
      cordiality among themselves—the more, perhaps, because it was
      evident that the friendliness of their local hosts had suddenly evaporated—and,
      of all men in the world, the present incumbent of the Octavius pulpit now
      bore down upon them with noisy effusiveness, and defied evasion.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Brother Ware—we have never been interduced—but let me clasp
      your hand! And—Sister Ware, I presume—yours too!”
     </p>
    <p>
      He was a portly man, who held his head back so that his face seemed all
      jowl and mouth and sandy chin-whisker. He smiled broadly upon them with
      half-closed eyes, and shook hands again.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I said to 'em,” he went on with loud pretence of heartiness, “the minute
      I heerd your name called out for our dear Octavius, 'I must go over an'
      interduce myself.' It will be a heavy cross to part with those dear
      people, Brother Ware, but if anything could wean me to the notion, so to
      speak, it would be the knowledge that you are to take up my labors in
      their midst. Perhaps—ah—perhaps they ARE jest a trifle close
      in money matters, but they come out strong on revivals. They'll need a
      good deal o' stirrin' up about parsonage expenses, but, oh! such seasons
      of grace as we've experienced there together!” He shook his head, and
      closed his eyes altogether, as if transported by his memories.
    </p>
    <p>
      Brother Ware smiled faintly in decorous response, and bowed in silence;
      but his wife resented the unctuous beaming of content on the other's wide
      countenance, and could not restrain her tongue.
    </p>
    <p>
      “You seem to bear up tolerably well under this heavy cross, as you call
      it,” she said sharply.
    </p>
    <p>
      “The will o' the Lord, Sister Ware—the will o' the Lord!” he
      responded, disposed for the instant to put on his pompous manner with her,
      and then deciding to smile again as he moved off. The circumstance that he
      was to get an additional three hundred dollars yearly in his new place was
      not mentioned between them.
    </p>
    <p>
      By a mutual impulse the young couple, when they had at last gained the
      cool open air, crossed the street to the side where over-hanging trees
      shaded the infrequent lamps, and they might be comparatively alone. The
      wife had taken her husband's arm, and pressed closely upon it as they
      walked. For a time no word passed, but finally he said, in a grave voice,—
    </p>
    <p>
      “It is hard upon you, poor girl.”
     </p>
    <p>
      Then she stopped short, buried her face against his shoulder, and fell to
      sobbing.
    </p>
    <p>
      He strove with gentle, whispered remonstrance to win her from this mood,
      and after a few moments she lifted her head and they resumed their walk,
      she wiping her eyes as they went.
    </p>
    <p>
      “I couldn't keep it in a minute longer!” she said, catching her breath
      between phrases. “Oh, WHY do they behave so badly to us, Theron?”
     </p>
    <p>
      He smiled down momentarily upon her as they moved along, and patted her
      hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      “Somebody must have the poor places, Alice,” he said consolingly. “I am a
      young man yet, remember. We must take our turn, and be patient. For 'we
      know that all things work together for good.'”
     </p>
    <p>
      “And your sermon was so head-and-shoulders above all the others!” she went
      on breathlessly. “Everybody said so! And Mrs. Parshall heard it so DIRECT
      that you were to be sent here, and I know she told everybody how much I
      was lotting on it—I wish we could go right off tonight without going
      to her house—I shall be ashamed to look her in the face—and of
      course she knows we're poked off to that miserable Octavius.—Why,
      Theron, they tell me it's a worse place even than we've got now!”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, not at all,” he put in reassuringly. “It has grown to be a large town—oh,
      quite twice the size of Tyre. It's a great Irish place, I've heard. Our
      own church seems to be a good deal run down there. We must build it up
      again; and the salary is better—a little.”
     </p>
    <p>
      But he too was depressed, and they walked on toward their temporary
      lodging in a silence full of mutual grief. It was not until they had come
      within sight of this goal that he prefaced by a little sigh of resignation
      these further words,—
    </p>
    <p>
      “Come—let us make the best of it, my girl! After all, we are in the
      hands of the Lord.”
     </p>
    <p>
      “Oh, don't, Theron!” she said hastily. “Don't talk to me about the Lord
      tonight; I can't bear it!”
     </p>
    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
